No matter the decade, America's very foundation is rooted in racism and racial cruelty. it's passed on generationally. It's a pathology that is far reaching and as "American, as apple pie and baseball! I can't say any of this was a surprise save for Lucille Ball. A lot of it was fear of being "upstaged" by black talent! Sammy Davis Jr. was apparently in the company of snakes...the Rat Pack be damned!



Reply


@MaloneGlobalUniversity
0 seconds ago
Your comment is similar to many of those expressed by African Americans. 

The "apple pie" sentiment reminds me that America provides the environment for racial bigotry.

Sammy Davis sticks out as a Hebrew African in a predominantly white group that appears biased. Growing up in the 80's he seemed out of place and I did not trust the whites around him. Later I find out that he is a member of a satanic group.  So Blacks that are in satanic groups are more likely to give support to white racists. Being aligned with the Jews ironically increases those odds.

 So far Sammy has three strikes against him: 

1) He is seen as only a token member of the predominantly white Rat Pack. He needed to be affiliated with Black groups not white ones. 

2) He uses Jewish identity to downplay his African American personhood.

3) He pledges loyalty to satanism to improve his condition.


Sammy Davis often is quoted as making truthful statements regarding the African American experience and plight of the civil rights struggle. These comments are underscored by his anti-blackness as a satanic jew who was used by the rat pack  as political blackface by the Rat Pack to increase social license.



I'm a 74-year-old black man, and I have always known that if you were white, an actor, producer, or director in Hollywood, an industry titan, or a national politician, and born before and after the start of the 20th century, you are/were a racist, because of the times in which you lived! It's as simple as that!

95


Reply


4 replies

@glendaharvey2676
2 days ago
Not just the time born, but even now

9


Reply


@MaloneGlobalUniversity
23 hours ago
There were whites who argued for fair treatment of Africans during all years of America's existence. You cannot write racism as a product of its time. That is deflection.