Malone Algebra 

written by Joseph Malone



Table of Contents
Preface	3
Math Vocabulary and Concepts	5
Glossary	6
Operations	11
Arithmetic basics	13
Counting Basics	15
Property Laws	24
The Laws of Exponents	35
Polynomials	38
Graphing and functions	60
 Function defined plainly	62
Determining whether an equation is a function or if an equation has an inverse	78
Operations&Compositions	88
Quadratics 	111
Quadratic Formula	117
Graphing Quadratics 	125
Why (x+h) moves graph left and why (x–h) moves graph right	126
Quartics and other higher power quadratics 	130
Exponential functions f(x) = ax	132
Logarithmic Functions loga(x)	133
Combinatorics	136
Geometry	137
Trigonometry	138
Word Problems	139






















Preface
This book will cover all math from high school algebra to fourth year linear algebra. It will use mixed examples through out blending advanced concepts with foundational skills. It will start off will algebra then mix in calculus in the beginning with just enough geometry and trigonometry to cover all important topics necessary for passing assessment into a first year course at the university level. It also will cover the first two years of a masters degree. 
 
Since this is an exhaustive undertaking emphasis will be on building foundation through clear understanding of vocabulary and mathematical terms. All math with be cross linked as much as possible so that time can be spared and more ground covered. There will be thorough definition, illustrations, and processes shown for every operation in math. With an understanding of how to do math the idea is you will not actually have to due much. Will try to cover 4 years of high school math in one year and four years of college math in one year from a strong pure sense while also adding abstraction. Adding abstraction shows readers the order in which math progresses giving them early exposure. The more exposure they have the more likely they will seek advanced math or be able to create their own equations and formulas sooner. 

Formal logic and writing proofs will be covered. Early definitions will be given plainly so that children are not overwhelmed. I will try to breeze through each topic as fast as I can while leaving no question as to how I arrived at the logic I did. To bridge different math the early explanations are short so it does not interrupt the flow of instruction. I am putting many pieces of information that has been surmized from my own experience plus the internet and other books. If you feel you need more practice in a certain area buy a dedicated used  algebra or calculus book from a thrift store for less that $20 each.

In reality you do not need to spend time extraneously plodding over the same questions over and over. You need a concise view of all the mathematics and their relationship to each other. You will be able to create equations that explain your real life situations and be able to solve them will ever increasing sophistication. In addition you should gain confidence to explore other topics not covered in this book once you have completed it. See what math others are doing and you the internet to join their conversations and work on projects with them. Experiment with their formulas and write your own. 

There are two parts to math and they are the pure and the applied. Applied is the area that defines job skills and real life conditions. Pure is abstract in the sense that it only serves as a teaching model to give instruction on the legal operations that can be done within the confines of the agreed upon laws of math. Pure defines what math is and is not and applied is how you use it to enrich your life. Math as a tool is used to solve real world problems and if it is not doing that then it has failed its purpose and real for even being. Concepts will be introduced in a very nontraditional format but still achieve the same goal of teaching. With that being said here are things to consider: 

1.  I wrote this book for everyone regardless of skill or age. Only basic arithmetic skills like
 (+, -,, ÷)  are required. Most people have already learned these skills in 4th-6th grade so I do not want to rehash basics that far back. If kids are reading this book it will make clear subjects and terms that they are not likely to see until much later or might have missed. A kid reading this book will improve not only their math but all subjects they face in school as well as their personal life because of the strong logic that it will build in them. Even if the material is too advanced they benefit from having a well referenced book. It will prepare them for college and beyond.

2. This book is split into three parts. It is at once a formal textbook, a series of notes from an upperclassman, and a conversation with a peer. As it begins slow skip parts that you do not need to deal with. As it is conversational raise questions that you have and we can devise a solution together. There is no such thing as a perfect book and I worked hard to write this at consider cost of my own time and money. I wrote this book because my passion for this project and helping others outweighed any other goals in life that had I pursued I would have been better of financially and socially. I put priority into this project above my own needs so that others would not have to go through the trouble of trial and error doing google or you tube searches to get bits or pieces of information they were looking for. This book truly does replace others attempts and it does not come with a subscription or or other reoccurring costs. Once you own this book it is yours to keep forever and use not only for yourself but for your children and friends as well.		

3. Definitions will get more rigorous but start casually for ease of use. They will not be vague however. Certain parts that are basic may have examples that seem to be overly lengthy taking up a page or more. I only do that so that all my constraints are met to keep in theme of the book. I can not assume what people know or their educational exposure outside this book. This is to be a self contained reference except for the glaring omission of problems to solve. When a problem is given it is dealt with in the most complete manner possible so multiple teaching points are given. 

Other books do not do this. There were points where I was tempted to follow more professional texts that stated the process, gave an example, and then stated process once more and was done. I take a more examined look that goes past giving clues and deconstructs a problem as much as I can until there are no unknowns left about it. I only go onto the next instruction when I am satisfied that I have nothing more to explore or prove. This actually cuts time required to learn because nothing is left hidden or unexplained that will lead to confusion or lack of understanding later. This tends to happen when changing course to course and book to book. There are gaps.

4.  Many books exist that teach the basics. I go beyond them by taking advanced concepts and making them easy to understand and then applying them in a real situation where applicable. By doing this I transition from textbook lecturer to enthusiastic individual willing to share his notes on a given subject or problem. This does away from the standard teacher student relationship by giving readers what an authoritive book won't, the clear approaches to process without quizing them or challenging them to find it.

5. The order of this book will be very simple algebra applied with higher level concepts like functions and Greek notation. I am not making easy problems harder, I am introducing higher concepts earlier using almost too easy problems. This let's readers see the full mechanics under the hood so they can move to any course work any where and know what to do. In this sense this is less a textbook but more a tutorial or how to  guide. 

6. After algebra I will show calculus and then linear algebra. After foundations and terminology is covered math will be used in a more direct sense. Students will be able to write their own formulas for over 189 real life problems. 

7. I give exhaustive explanations for every math word and sign that exists so there is no gaps in knowledge. This benefits kids and adults alike. If you can read English you can use this book. I write and speak at a university level without leaving readers behind. If you do not know a word look it up and not only get better math skills but reading and writing as well.

8. Outside of process there are also fun concepts introduced to make math interesting. While technically not required for success at math the history, language and anecdotes makes for a greater experience. 

9. Finally, the most advanced subjects are beyond the scope of this book. This is mostly for foundation building so that readers will be able to read the sequel to this book I plan on producing. These go beyond pure math into masters and doctorate degrees in engineering fields like electrical and programming as well as gravitational and quantum mechanics. These sciences are founded in math but also require specialized study of chemistry and other physics. I can not prime readers for that in one volume. I will touch on what I can but will need to split documents into separate volumes for portability and ease of use. I do not try to put all into one book and only combine the information I do for fear of it being separated and do not want that to happen.  


Look for the glossary of terms in the front of the book as well as having them fully covered through the text. I also included many reference tables and useful data sets that appear in the back and front for ease of use.
Math Vocabulary and Concepts
Basic math:

1. Arithmetic- The study of adding, subtracting, multiplying, dividing, powering, and radicalizing. 

2. Algebra-  The study of balancing equations using variables to solve for an unknown quantity using variables, graphing and functions.

3. Geometry- The study of shapes and their dimensions, number of sides, measure of their angles using proofs.

4. Trigonometry- The study of right angles and their measure. Using laws of trig to find unknown
angles or distances. 

5. Calculus- The study of rates of change using formulas for slope such as (y2 -y1) ÷ (x2 -x1). 

6. Statistics- The study of odds and probability. This leads into further number theory.

Advanced math:

1. Linear algebra- Studying higher level linear equations using matrices, determinants, and Gaussian elimination.

2. Discrete mathematics- Studying logic in the form of formal written proofs, Getting into set theory and set notation to list things in groups of numbers called sets.

3. vector algebra- Related to linear algebra, focuses on moving through vector spaces using multi dimensional plane geometry.

4. Tensor calculus

5. Lambda calculus- Formalizing mathematical concepts in a pure form for later use in emerging fields such as science and computer technology.

6. Differential equations – Higher levels of calculus concepts dealing with vector spaces.

7. Number theory – Statistics using tools like Bayesian theorems and computer modeling. It helps to minor in programming using R language and libraries. 

8. Combinatorics – Set theory with application for computer algorithms.

9. Topology- Algorithms using ordered data in a set theory environment.






Glossary
Variable: Letter used to symbolize unspecified numbers. Used in algebra. If x-1 =7 then x =8. Since x can be anything it varies depending on the numbers around it. It is called variable because it varies, the opposite of constants like 1 or 7 which do not vary, they have constant value.

Algebraic expression:  Using letters as variables in equations. An expression is a sum written without an equation sign. An equation has an equals sign like 2+2 = 4 while an expression is 2+2. If we use algebra then 2x – 1 = 4 simply writing “2x – 1” would be an expression.

Factors: Numbers used to form a product. If 2∙3 =6 then 2 and 3 are factors of 6.
Product: Result of numbers multiplied.

Raised dot: This symbol · used for multiplication. Has seven other names including interpunct. 
Obelus: This symbol ÷ used for division. Also called multiplication sign. We just use forward slash /.

Fraction bar: The line between two numbers to indicate a fractional sum such as this ⅓ . Can also be horizontal but that is mostly used for solving equations as a fill in for an obelus since fractions are the quotient of division. Forward slash can be used in place of a horizontal bar if a computer does not have access to it.   Alt 0188= ¼   alt 0189= ½  alt 0190= ¾. 

Quotient: The resulting number from a division operation. The dividend is operated on by the divisor resulting in a quotient. 100 divided by 4 equals 25. 100 is the dividend, 4 is the divisor, 25 is the quotient.

Ratio: A ratio is sometimes but not always a fraction comparing two amounts. In chemistry and science we call this a solution or a proportion. Ratios tell either the amount of different elements added to each other at what rate or the rate at which something is changing. Ratios are written using a colon as 10:1 properly and spoke,” Ten to one”. This differs from writing them as a fraction since in this case we want to know the two quantities being compared. Using both numbers tells us that one element is 10x greater than the other. A ratio given as a fraction would entice us to simply the fraction or write it as a decimal. The ratio 3:2 becomes 1.5, causing the second element to be lost and only the first one remaining. Context of subject matter determines whether we want to keep information or not however colon formula is often preferential.

Base: The number to be expanded using exponents. 107 has 10 as the base and 7 as the exponent, or power.

Power: Another name for exponent. 22  is “2 squared”, 23 is “2 cubed”, 24  is “2 to the fourth, 2 raised to a power of four, 2 expanded to a power of four”. Raising to a power of 2 is called squaring it, raising to a power of 3 is cubing, raising to 4 and beyond is raising to a power of.

Squared: Any number times itself is said to be squared. 2·2=4 4 is the square of 2.
Cubed: Any number raised to a power of three is cubed. 27 is the cube of 3. A base times itself twice. 33= 27.

Raised to a power of: Taking a base and raising it to a power of 4 or higher. See previous example of “power”.

Gross: 122= 144. This is called a “gross”.
Great gross: 123=1728

Volume: The amount of space inside a three dimensional shape serving as a container for some medium such as air or liquid. Used to measure the size of something using mathematical constants. Formula is lwh= volume when l= length, w= width and h= height. Used in geometry and related fields.

Area: The space occupying a two dimensional plane measured by multiplying length by width. Formula is given as lw= area when l= length and w= width. Used in geometry and related fields.

Formula for perimeter: The length of the borders of a two dimensional shape or plane. 
			  Formula varies based on the number of sides a two dimensional plane has. 

1. Triangle         = x+y+z. 		Measure all three sides and add.
2. Square            = 4x. 			Measure one side and multiply by 4.
3. Parallelogram = 2(x+y). 		Measure sides then distribute out and add.
4. Trapezoid        = x+2y+z. 		Measure sides then add.

5. Circle= dπ.     				Multiply diameter by π or multiply radius by 2 and them multiply by pi. 						Also called circumference.
6. Oval track= πh+2l. 			Circumfrence of circle plus perimeter of rectangle.

Example using 60 for height and 120 for length, round to appropriate number of digits:

Perimeter of track:       π·60+2(120) 	→	π60+240 → 	188.49+240	→	 428.496 meters

7. πr2. Measure the widest part of the circle to find the diameter then divide it in half to find the radius. Take the radius and square it then multiply by π.

For entire area of track:      lw+ πr2 	→	60·120+ π302	→	7200+π900	→ ≈ 10,027.43 
You only have to find area of the whole circle not two individual halves, (area of rectangle +area of circle).

Operators/Operations: There are six operators + – ÷ ∙ ^ √ used to perform arithmetic. 

Operators are the symbols used to indicate the operation to be performed. Operations the method of increasing or decreasing a quantity or number. Operation signs are called addition (+), subtraction (-), times or multiply (×  or ·), divide (÷), power (^ or write as exponents using superscripts), and radical (√). 

There are six main operations, each corresponding to it's own unique symbol telling how to proceed with determining a solution to a given problem. More symbols can and do exist for the same operations so there is some redundancy. These other symbols exist as a convenience so that they make reading an equation easier to do. Often the (×) is replaced in algebra with the center dot (·) so that the × sign is not confused with the variable “x”.

Most if not all math symbols (called operator signs or math signs) come from earlier and archaic sources. Many times these symbols have been repurposed for many different uses. They have variant sizing, patterns, and different names. Sometimes there are different names for the different versions. Mostly used for annotating literature these older names and versions are not likely appropriate for math or proofreading anymore. They are obsolete and many people would not understand them or their purpose making them only acceptable for private use and not public consumption. You are not expected to know these or learn them. You are however expected to learn the Greek letters and symbols commonly used in math, physics, and engineering. Using archaic and obsolete symbolism will make notes messier and hard to read so their use is discouraged. In addition to learning math operators and signs it is also useful to learn keyboard shortcuts to put them in computer text software programs. These signs do not appear on modern keyboards so you but to insert them using alt shortcuts. Alt shortcuts only work on keyboards with a 10 key numerical pad so you need to invest in one if you want to be productive. Learning to insert them onto your documents and websites is handy. They can even be used in search bars and comments. To embed them in a webpage you have to use html codes and they are different but same idea as alt shortcuts. Warning: Some courses have different meanings for use!

Statement: A line of text or something said giving some description to the conditions of the facts at hand. We use these facts to form our equations so that we can solve them. Statements are often used in word problems when explaining the equation in written English rather than using algebraic expressions. Note however that algebraic expressions and equations themselves are forms of statements as well. In closing a statement must be true or false but not both.

Open sentences: Mathematical expressions containing variables whether written in script or as an equation that must be solved before you know if the statement it is making is true or false.
Solution: A solution is a number that solves our equation.
Solving the open sentence: When we replace variables with numbers the sentence is said to be solved.
Equation:  Equations are expressions containing an equals sign. If it has an equal sign it is an equation. A set or string of terms with operations that requires working to derive a solution. In Algebra equations are balanced so that two sides, a left and right, or separated by an equation sign (=). To keep the equation true you have to perform equal actions on either side or your equation will become unbalanced and therefore false.
Set: Sets group numbers or objects together so that they are listed using parentheses to differentiate them from other data. Using parentheses like this is called set notation and is mainly a study of set theory. Set theory uses an elongated version (∈ ) of the Greek letter epsilon (ε) to denote members of a set. Members of a set are also called elements. This is used in computer science for object orientated programming (oop), writing strings, arrays, and other places where programming code deals with nested items. Sets also show up in algebra when dealing with simple linear equations and plotting coordinates on a linear graph. Groups of points, called ordered pairs [(0,1)], can be collected and placed inside set notation to display what valves are relevant or appearing for a given function or chart.

For example if we have the points (0,1), (1,2), (2,3),(…), we would nest them like  {(0,1); (1,2); (2,3);(...). The ε means that each pair is a “member” of this set.  

Sets are also used in number theory and many other places in math. In spreadsheets the Greek letter sigma (Σ) is used to add. We call this summation or the summing of values inside the nested parentheticals. For example if we had Σ={1,2,3,} it would read as “the summation of {1,2,3,}” and that means that we add and get “6”.  Whether actually adding or just knowing that the values inside are to be treated as a singular value this is how sigma is used.

Note: Greek letters vary in meaning from branch of one mathematics to another. Uppercase epsilon looks just like the English letter E. To avoid confusion exaggerated versions are used to illustrate the meaning better. This is why ∈  is used instead of E or the regular Greek letters. Uppercase epsilon is usually for elements of a set and lower case epsilon (ε) is for denoting a small quantity. There are many uses for the Greek letters and I have included as many of them and their alt codes that I know but sometimes there will be contradictions in terms so you will have to substitute whatever you can and just improvise. If you are using eccentric notation that a reader is likely to be unfamiliar with make that clear before using ambiguous terms. It really only matters that you and your intended audience can understand what notation you are using not anybody else.

Subset: A set with a set. Infinity (∞) is the set of all numbers. All even numbers are a subset of ∞. All even numbers ending with zero are a subset of that set. All even numbers ending with zero under 100 are a deeper nested subset still. A subset would be a level below a superset.

For example: ∈ {+∞ (2,4,6...(10,20,30...100,110,120...(10,20...90)))}. 

This shows that within positive infinity (as denoted by the +) a subset exists that contains the set of infinite positive even numbers (as denoted by the ellipsis (…)). Then exists all positive even tens, finally there exists a set of even tens that ends at 90.  

Superset: A set containing subsets. A superset would be a level above a subset. 

Null: Ø. This means that a set contains no numbers. ∈ {Ø} means that there are no numbers in this set, not even zero as a placeholder. Literally {} instead of {0}. If null then does not exist abbreviated as dne. Difference between null and zero is if a function mapped 0,1,2 to elements a,b,c then 0 = a; if f(x) ≠ a, b, or c then f(x) ≠ null. Null is like saying n/a for not applicable meaning you exceeded a domain causing a null status.

If selecting items from menu required ordering #0, #1, or #2 then  Ø set is no selection at all.
A = apple= 0	B = banana = 1     C = cherries = 2
f(0) = apple	f(1) = banana	f(2) = cherries	f() = Ø nothing.

Empty set: A set with no elements is called empty or null.

Replacement set: The solution to an open sentence occurs when all variables have been accounted for using numerals. The replacement set for the variables is the solution to the expression. In factoring polynomials you often use replacement sets to find the factors that make up a trinomial.

Negation: Negation means reversing an operation or taking the opposite of something. Subtraction negates or is the negation of addition. By multiplying by a -1 we can negate terms of equations (indeed the entire equation itself) to be the opposite of sign of what it already is. This is useful simplifying and reducing equations to make them cleaner looking or easier to solve.

Properties: Properties are rules that dictate how order of operations should behave and what is permissible when reordering terms to restructure an equation. Properties show an how the numbers behave and interact with each other on a foundational level as opposed to simply solving for an answer. Understanding and having innate sense of properties shows an advanced mastery of mathematics and goes beyond superficial plugging in of values to get a result. You know how the numbers behave conceptually rather then mechanically.

Additive identity property: For any number a,  a+0 = a. This states that 0 does not change the value.
 Multiplicative identity property: For any number a, a·1 = 1·a. 

Multiplicative property of zero:  For any number a, a·0 = 0·a. This states that the order of terms is irrelevant and moving them around does not change the answer. [In addition any number times zero is zero. Further diving by zero is undefined. It is undefined since dividing by zero does not give us non zero factor.

Additive inverse: The number of the same numerical value but opposite quality value. Two additive inverses sum to zero.  
Multiplicative inverse: The reciprocal of a number or function. The product of two reciprocals is 1. Ex. ⅕∙5 = 1.
Properties of equality: The following properties are true for any a, b, or c. 
Reflexive:  a = a
Symmetric: if a = b then b = a. This just restates commutation law or uses double substitution.
Transitive: if a = b and b = c then a = c.
Substitutive: if a = b then a may be replaced by b. 

Distributive property: For any numbers a, b, c:

a (b + c) = ab + ac   and    (b + c) a = ba + ca 
a (b – c) = ab –  bc   and    (b – c) a = ba – ca     

To remove parenthetical terms you must use multiplication by the factor outside the parentheses, in this case “a”. If there is no factor then multiply by “1” to cancel the parentheses. If there is a minus sign infront of the parenthetical then you must multiply every term inside by –1. This inverts all signs of the terms (sign flipping) changing them to there additive inverses: 5(x+2) = 5x+10 	–5(x+2) = –5x – 2     –(5x+3x–4) becomes –5x–3x+4.

Commutative property:  This states that the order of terms is irrelevant and moving them around does not change the answer for addition and multiplication. 2∙3/4 is same as 3∙2/4 , 2∙¾ , 3∙ ½.   

Associative property: For any numbers a, b, c (a + b) + c = a + (b + c) and (ab) c = a (bc). It says that if you change the grouping for + or ÷ the result is the same.

Term: Is a number, variable, product, quotient, or mixed number. Terms are the groups of numbers separated by operands. Each term may be composed of multiple parts but is considered a single value. A trinomial has three terms each separated by a plus or minus sign.

Simplest form: An expression without like terms or parentheses. The final answer when solving equations.

Like terms: Terms that contain the same variables raised to the same power. 5x2 and 4x2  are like terms but 2x3 and 5x are not. 5xy5z and y5xz are like but 5x5yz and 5xy5z2  are not. 

Coefficient: The numeral factor in a mixed number. In 5x the coefficient is 5 because it is a constant number.    
Constant:  A number that is not a variable. Numbers 0-9 are constants because they are not alphabetic. In 5x the coefficient 5 is the constant and x is the variable. All variables have letters to denote their changing values. All constants except irrationals have numbers to denote their value is always the same. Some constants like Euler's number “ e ”, the imaginary number “ i ”, and π use letters to represent their value but this is because they are very long and only used as a convenience. They are considered constants because their value is known and it does not change. The difference between a variable and a constant is 5 is constantly 5 while x varies.
Pi: The mathematical constant approximated by 3.141592 or 22/7 or 355/113 to denote the symbol π.  
Pi is used to calculate circumference and area of circles using the formulas dπ for circumference and πr2  for area. There are different approximations for pi but the symbol always remains the same.  

Domain: The set containing x values of a graph. What choices exist for x as an input for a function.
Range: The set containing x values of a graph. What choices exist for x as an output for a function.

Graph: The line or curve of a set of plotted points on a piece of graph paper. Literally the image itself.
Function: A ratio of x:y used to write equations in graph form. Written as f(x) = equation.
Inverse function: The graph of a function that has inverted (swapped) x and y values. Written as f-1(x) = equation.

Slope: The tangent ratio of a line given by the formula M= y2 – y1/x2 – x1. Slope is how angled a line is to the x-axis. The formula simplifies to M = y/x. The M is chosen because it looks like a mountain slope making it easier to recognize. Tangent is a trig function that is the height of a triangle divided by it's base. Tangent =M =sine/cosine.

Linear Equation: A line graph given by the formula y = Mx+b. This is heavily used in algebra and beyond.
Quadratic Equation: A parabola graph. Quadratics are second degree polynomials while lines are 1 degree.
Cubic Equation: A graph having 3 degrees. Think of phase “giving someone the third degree”. 

Cartesian grid: A sheet of graph paper with numbered lines called axes for plotting points. Any rectangular grid for graphing.

x-axis: The horizontal number line in a rectangular coordinate system.
y-axis: The vertical number line in a rectangular coordinate system.

x-value: The horizontal distance from the y-axis. This is the x in an ordered pair (x,y).
y-value: The vertical distance from the x-axis. This is the y in an ordered pair (x,y).

Coordinate: The location of a point given by distance from the origin of two axes. Pronounced “ax ease”Axes is plural of axis. Also called “ordered pairs”.

Point: In geometry a location having zero area. A point is given by (x,y) using x and y values.


In arguments a point is a logical conclusion. Two or more points that co-linear creates a “line of thought”. 
If points are not colinear then the person is “going off on a tangent”. A tangent line touches another line forming a 90° vertex so that a tangent is going off track from the original direction at the fastest rate possible (∞). If two lines of thought intersect at a vertex that point called the “solution” to a “system of equations”. In conflict two opposing lines of thought that intersect have a solution that represents compromise both parties can and will agree to. A parabola is a curved line forming an elliptical vertex given x2. There are different symbolic interpretations but either building a base for your case using x2 to represent area in 2 dimensions or approaching a problem from two different angles which share symmetry and meet at the vertex as a conclusion. The former is easy to apply the latter represents teamwork or independently coming to the same conclusion from different points or using proof to confirm a suspected idea. A cubic is 3d so is a solid block of evidence. Giving someone the third degree involves invasive questioning to gather as much evidence as possible. Depending on the quantity and quality of the evidence a verdict is reached. Side note a vertex represents a corner of 90° – θ where theta can be 0°<θ<90°. 

Verdict and vertex share Latin roots. Ver-dict is “90° diction” of a decision meaning two points of view of complete opposite rotation meet at a single conclusion: yes or no, guilty or innocent. Start at the meeting point and work backwards. You have two rays forming a 90° angle and extend to – ∞ for x and ∞ for y. These are complete opposite axes at there furthest points, one a positive and the other a negative corresponding to yes~innocent or no~guilty. Ver-tex is lesser important but refers to the crossing of lines to make letters of the alphabet stemming from Phoenician cuneiform the precursor to Latin. Versed is 90° and tex is text meaning writing as in context which means “with text” or the other writing that goes with previous writing to explain it. Context is always the definition as it defines or illustrates the picture,  which is a graph made from points. On a different note a song has “verses” which is “rounds” of singing representing a rotation in degrees from end of line to end of line making an arc angle till angles added to 360°, the Greeks represented music mathematically in their cults, too much to surmise here. Note here is a double ontaundre (french for tangent because I am going off on a tangent completely changing points) because note can refer to music or prose) Compare verses with the homophone versus. Verses means lyrics referring to bullion writing which turns and twists down the page and versus is two competing objects, in math versus is the battle between the ratio x:y of a function. Ratios rotate like gear ratios or credit/debit ratios ie revolving credit and capitalizing versus expensing.)     Explore more subjects like foreign language, engineering, music theory, and finance.

You have a “overturned verdict” which is a complex rotation of degree 4 meaning an inverse function where x and y are swapped making no~guilty becomes yes~innocent and vise versa. A “snap verdict” where a line of thought P1→P2→P4 = A→B→D where you have a hole in your argument at point C. Holes in your argument (also called logic) are gaps or leaps of faith that lead to illogical rational and bad policy. Of course a hole in a function is given by dividing by 0 creating a domain error at that point. There are many other figures of speech using verdict that are logical in directly mathematical way because that is how legal terminology originated.     


Operations

There are four operations in pre-algebra called addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Algebra adds two more operations called exponentiation, radicalization. Together these six operations are called arithmetic. Arithmetic means adding numbers. It is the beginning of all math. Algebra does more than add numbers, it takes numbers and organizes them by using variables, performing functions, graphing, and using formulas.

The six operations have symbols called operators telling you what operation to do. Every operation has an opposite operation called its reciprocal operation. The word reciprocal and inverse almost mean the same thing but are used slightly differently depending on context. In general all math from arithmetic to calculus is just adding numbers some way. Here is a table to show some language and what symbol to use:

Operation
Symbol used
English 
Reciprocal/Inverse Operation
Addition 
+ plus sign
Sum+sum= total
total – sum = Sum 
Subtraction
– minus sign
Minuend – subtrahend = difference 
difference + subtrahend = Minuend
Multiplication
∙ dot
Factor ∙ factor = product
product÷factor = Factor
Division
÷ obelus / slash 
dividend÷divisor = quotient
quotient ∙ divisor = dividend
Exponentiation
“powers” 
^ caret
superscript

root^exponent = product
rootexponent = product 
base^exponent = power
base^power = product
exponent√product = root

Radicalization
√ radical sign 
exponent√product = root
rootexponent = product
Every operation has an inverse operation that takes the answer and works backwards to get the starting number. This can be used to check your work. Checking your work can be used to prove you are correct.
Later in geometry you will be asked to show “formal proofs”. 
 
If we are adding numbers like 2+3=5 we use plus sign “+”. 
The numbers being added are called addends or sums, the number is called the sum or total. 
The opposite of addition is called subtraction. Addition and subtraction are reciprocal operations of each other.

Here is a short proof: 2+2 =4 because 4 – 2 = 2. Teachers call this “proving your work”.
We used the reciprocal operation to work backwards starting with the previous answer 4 and the using the opposite of “+” sign and instead use “–” sign taking 2 away instead of adding 2. This can be shown on a number line. A number line has numbers on it evenly spaced like a ruler. The little lines that point to the number are called “tick marks” or “graduations”. A number line showing numbers from 0 to 10 is shown below. 


Numbers never end so we can make a number line shorter or longer. We can even go all the way to infinity if we use a symbol for it. When we add we place a dot on the starting number and move the dot by the addend to the answer. The addend is the number we are adding. If we add 2+2=4 we place a dot at 2 and move 2 units to 4. We count until we are at the right place. Sometimes we draw a curve from the first dot to the second dot. There are many ways to use a number line. 

There is a red dot at 2 and 4. The curve shows we added “+2” units.

A number can be negative or positive. If negative we use a minus sign like this –2. 
Negative numbers are called “signed numbers” because they have a minus sign.
  
This shows adding in blue and subtracting in red. 			      This shows a number line with negative numbers
Adding is the inverse of subtraction.





We subtract two numbers that are the same like 2–2 = 0 we get 0. This is also the same as adding a two numbers that have the same value but different signs like –2+2 = 0. When the numbers are the same value but have different value signs they cancel. In adding to cancel is to equal 0.  When two sums cancel they are called additive inverses. 

– 4 and 4 are additive inverses. If we add them they cancel to equal 0. Note that positive numbers are blue and negative numbers are red but 0 is black. Zero is in the middle of all numbers so it is neutral being neither + or –. This concept is used in graphing later.

If we are multiplying we are adding by groups. We do this to make equations shorter and faster to perform.
If we are powering we are adding groups of groups of numbers.

Addition is adding numbers:					                          2+3 = 5		
Multiplication is adding groups of numbers:			                 2∙3 = 3+3 = 6
Powering is adding groups of groups of the same numbers:	23= 2∙2∙2 = 2+2+2+2 = 8

If we add we just count how many we have. When we multiply we count the number of groups we have and call it “groups”. Then we count how many per group and call it our “base”. Base number is the amount of each group. Base is our root number and also called quantity. Multiplication is “base times groups” or “quantity times amount per group”. 

If we keep adding the same number we should multiply: 2+2+2 = 3∙2 = 6
If we keeping multiplying the same number we should power: 2∙2∙2 = 2^3 or 23 = 8

Subtraction is adding negative numbers to positive or negative numbers: – 2+7 = 7 – 2 and – 2 – 7 = – 7 – 2.
Division is subtracting numbers by groups: 35/7 = 5 because 35 –5 –5 –5 –5 –5 –5 –5 = 5.
Rooting is dividing by groups: 3√27 = 3 because 27/3/3 = 3.

Addition is commutative meaning they can be added any order and the result is the same: 3+7 = 10 and 7+3 = 10.
Multiplication is also commutative: 3∙7 = 21 and 7∙3 = 21. We can have 3 groups of 7 or 7 groups of 3.
Division is not commutative: (1÷2)÷3 ≠ 1÷(2÷3)	because ⅙ ≠ 1.5

But multiplication by a reciprocal fraction is...we say“Two divided by three equals two divided by three.”  

If I have...  1∙2÷3 = 2÷3∙1  because 1∙2/3 = ⅔∙1
(3∙4)÷2 = 3∙(4÷2) because 12/2 = 3∙2.		Changing the () is called association which is like commutation
3∙4/2 = 4÷2∙3	    because 12/2 = 2∙3		Changing the order is called commutative	

I get the same results but use a different law to give me permission. Stating a law is called “justification”.
We sTate laws so we can prove we did the problem right and got the right answer to avoid arguments.

(1÷2)÷3 ≠ 1÷(2÷3)	because ⅙ ≠ 1.5	Order matters for division. Division does not let you change order.
I have no justification for saying (1÷2)÷3 = 1÷(2÷3) because there is no law giving me permission.
Arithmetic basics

The basics of arithmetic are the operations, the order of operations called Pemdas, and the property laws. 

The acronym Pemdas states the “order of operations”. Operations must be performed in a specific order or else answers will vary. The letters stand for Parentheses, exponents, multiply and divide, addition and subtraction.
Parentheses are used to group numbers to show in what order steps should be taken. Equations are solved doing the operations from Pemdas in the order stated. Math is done starting with the most left number then moving right. Something inside parentheses should be done first followed by exponents then multiplication and division, with addition and subtraction at the end. 

Some equations have only one or all operator signs and following the correct order means that two different people will get the same answer. If there were not these rules nobody would agree on the answer. This is the same as how people agree on the order of numbers. If they didn't one person would think 7 or 4 can after 1 in counting. These rules are rules because everybody agreed on the order of numbers and the order of operations.

What is “7 –4∙2” ? The correct answer is – 1 not 6 because multiplication comes before subtraction.

(7 – 4∙2)	First we multiply		(7 – 4∙2)	subtracting first is so wrong... 	
7 – 8		then subtract			 3∙2		then multiplying...		
– 1  		this is right			6		we get 6 which is not correct

See how following a different order gives different answers? This is why it is important to follow correct process or your answer will be different than everybody else's, like your friends or the answers in a teacher's book. 
Please follow the order so that we all are in agreement.

Multiplication and division can be done interchangeably as can addition with subtraction.   For example:

(2∙3÷4)		multiply first				(2∙3÷4)		this time divide		
6÷4		now divide				2∙¾ = 6/4 
1.5		this is correct				1.5		the answers are the same

(5+3–1)	add 5+3 first				(5+3–1)	this time add 3–1
8 – 1		subtract				5+ 2		now add
7		this is right				7		the answers are the same.

Why does a different order work this time? Because adding and subtracting are reciprocal, that is they share reciprocity. Changing this order doe not matter because they are inverses which means they act like almost the same operation. We see that subtracting a positive is the same as adding a negative like 3–1 = 3+(–1); and that dividing a whole number is the same as multiplying by a fraction like 10/2 = 10∙½.
4+√9

Because – and + are inverse operations order doesn't matter. 
Because  ∙ and ÷ are inverse operations order doesn't matter. 
But we still have to do ∙ and ÷ before + and – . 
We state this rule as “Multiplication does not share reciprocity with addition”.

For the example 10/2 = 10∙½ dividing by 2 is the same as multiplying by ½ because of fraction laws:

10÷2 = 5		10∙ ½ = 10/1 ∙½ = (10∙1)/(1∙2) = 10/2 = 5		both equal 5 
 
In algebra rewriting an equation is called “algebraic manipulation”. We do this almost every problem.
Follow the order from top to bottom as shown. Memorize Pemdas chart at right:
		
A few points
 
If a number is outside parentheses without an operator you multiply
If a number is in front of a radical you multiply 
Rooting is done during “E” in Pemdas
If “ – ”  is outside parentheses you flip all sign inside parentheses


For exponents radicals are obvious when to perform because they act like a grouping symbol. 

3√4 –1 		note that 3√4 = 3∙√4
3(2) – 1		note that √4 = 2 such that 3√4 = 3∙(2)		a radical is really a ()	
6 – 1			note that – 1 was not under the radical or it would have been grouped leaving 3√3
5

Although the radical symbol “√” means to root  a number, is really a parentheses in disguise. Taking the square root of 4 gave us 2. Since a 3 was in front of √4 we needed to write 3(2). Something like 3(2) means 3∙2. This is from point #1 “If a number is outside parentheses without an operator you multiply”. Point #2 is about “3√4”. 

Sometimes radicals have irrational roots so we leave them in radical form instead of writing them as a decimal.
Irrational numbers never end so it is better to write a radical than a decimal: √2 ≈ 1.41421356. The ≈ sign is called approximation sign and means we estimated the number by removing the small parts that go on forever.
2√2 ≈ 2.828 so you can see we are missing some numbers since 2√2 ≈ 2∙1.41421356. 

Point #3 is about radicals and require an in depth treatment but for now:

2∙2 = 22 = 4		we call this 2 to the 2nd power or “two squared”.
3∙3 = 32 = 9		we call this is 3 the 2nd  power or “three squared”.

Squaring a number means to multiply it by itself. This is simple. Taking a square root means to divide a number, “the square”, by one of its factors to get the other factor. We call a factor of a square a square root. 
“2 is the square root of 4” and “3 is the square root of 9” is how we say our answers. We could also say “second root” if we wanted.
 
Point #4 is about negative numbers: –1∙any number = –that number.

This is true: – 1∙4 =  –4			“negative one times four is negative four”
This is true: –1(7) =  –7 			“negative one times seven is negative seven”
This is true: –(52) =  –52 			“the additive inverse of fifty-two  is negative fifty-two”
This is true: –(2+3–4 )	 = ( –2–3+4)  		“the additive inverse of 2+3–4 is –2–3+4” 

Additive inverse means change all plus signs to minus signs and all minus signs to plus signs. 
We are inverting the operations and this means to reverse them so we are taking its inverse.
The operations were additive so we call this type of inverse “additive inverse”.
The slang term for taking an additive inverse is “flipping signs”.		                    
	
Multiplying a number n by –1 creates the additive inverse for that n. 
We write a rule, called a formula, that uses the script letter n be mean any number. 
We write this rule as an equation and follow it by replacing n with an actual number we want to take the inverse of. The formula for additive inverse is:  n∙ – 1= –n
Counting Basics

Counting basics introduces variables using set theory. From there we move on to property laws and better examples of algebra. Math after arithmetic is called “higher math”. In higher math we categorize numbers by type into groups called sets. The study of this is called set theory. “Counting basics” uses a simple introduction to set theory.

Before 0 or negative numbers were recognized by western, math numbers began at 1 and counted upwards. 
We call this system the “natural numbers”. Natural numbers are counting numbers of the set (1,2,3...). When you see numbers in a set they are written in either set notation as a series. A series is a pattern of numbers separated by commas inside parentheses to group them together as a set.

The set of counting numbers are whole positive numbers that start at 1. 
Remember that 0 is neither positive nor negative so it is not included.

The set of whole numbers is: (1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9…) 
The three dots are called “an ellipsis mark” or “ellipsis”. It means that the numbers go on forever. If we continue the series the numbers go forever by adding +1 to then number before the ellipsis.

If we start at 0 we have a different set called the “whole numbers”. Whole numbers are positive whole numbers.
The set of natural numbers is: (0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9…)  

If we start and 0 and either add 1 forever or subtract one forever we have all the positive and negative whole numbers. This set is called “integers”. Integers are whole numbers that can be positive or negative. 
This is the set we use most often in math. Because the numbers go in both direction forever we put ellipsis in the beginning to show that the series continues backwards forever. We are interested only in set integers and reals.
The set of integers uses two ellipsis: (…–4,–3,–2,–1,0,1,2,3,4…)  

The next set is fractions also called “quotients” because a fraction bar is a division bar. Fractions are made by taking a whole number and dividing it by a whole number to get a fractional number that is not whole. Fractions can be negative like –¼, mixed like 22½ or improper like 5/4. A fraction can be written like a fraction or a decimal or even a percent. The mixed fraction 22½ can be decimal like 22.5 or improper like 45/2 .

There are proper fractions, improper fractions, mixed fractions, and decimal fractions. 
All can be negative and all can be converted back and forth from a fraction to a decimal or percentage. 

A proper fraction: two whole numbers divided using a “/” that is less than “±1”. 
An improper fraction: a mixed fraction written as a fraction instead of a decimal. 
A mixed fraction: an improper fraction written as a decimal.

¼ and –¼ are proper fractions because they are part of a number.
45/2 and 5/4 are improper because they are mixed. 
We could say “mixed improper fractions” but that is redundant.
The set of fractions is: (all whole or negative fractions). There are fancy ways to write this that come up later.

The next set is “irrationals”. These are square roots and other radicals. Names like irrationals, radicals, roots, or even surds imply a rooting operation; we call these radicals for the radical symbol √.

There are the “real numbers” called the “reals” and they are all numbers except a unusual one called “complex numbers”. Finally the last set is call complex numbers which uses the letter i = √–1.   Complex numbers are not used until last part of Algebra for graphing and conics or hyperbolas. There are important ways to write the sets but that requires a study of set theory. Sets can be written dozens of way. Some more useful than others depending on what you want to convey. Instead of defining sets using formal logic I want to present a more informal definition using blackboard letters.
Blackboard letters are also called “double struck” letters because they have double lines. On blackboards they were written this way so that people did not mistake them for variables or other letters. The blackboard letters are the capital funny looking letters.

*This is very hard even for professional adult mathematicians and is excluded from books. What I offer here is not required but shown to provide early exposure to understand how to think and not be alarmed by complex concepts. Look at the definitions and then read the post script.

Every set is a superset of the subset before it:

Set ℕ=  Natural numbers. Starts at 1 ends at infinity.
Set 𝕎 = Whole positive numbers The same set as ℤ but 0 is excluded. W-hole is “With hole” at 0 on graph.
Set ℤ =  Integers which called Zahlen in German. This and reals are used in Algebra.
Set ℚ = Quotients is another name for fractions. Fractions are p/q where both p and q are integers.
Set 𝕀= Irrationals: roots taken from non-index-able numbers like √2 or constants like π or e.
Set ℝ =  Reals are all numbers except imaginary ones like √–1 or any of the form a+bi. 
Set ℂ =  Complex numbers are the set of imaginary ones like √–1 or any of the form a+bi.
 
The colored letters match the colored word in either meaning and/or show why that letter is chosen. 
The blackboard letters are the first letters of the word they represent. These 7 groups are basic and all the groups that exist unless somebody makes up there own group and gives it a letter. Algebra uses the integers and reals. You are not expected to know this or memorize these sets so that Is why I am telling you. Focus on the red sets.

Any set can be represented with a number line. Tools to find numbers, explain concepts or derive answers will use either a number line, a Cartesian graph, or a unit circle. With start with a number line to perform arithmetic functions. Then move on to graphing with uses two number lines, a horizontal number line called the x-axis, and a vertical number line called the y-axis. After Algebra concepts are mastered we introduce geometry with the use of the unit circle. The unit circle is a circle drawn on a Cartesian graph.  From geometry we introduce trigonometry and graph triangles in the unit circle. Following basic trigonometry comes advanced definitions of trig functions shown on a Cartesian graph. These definitions help lead to pre-calculus and calculus topics.  

The algebra concepts we want to focus on will be variables, functions and formulas.
In geometry the focus moves from to construction problems involving area and volume formulas. 

In Algebra1 we use integers, fractions, and radicals. This set of all these sets is called the reals. 
In Algebra2 begin to cover complex numbers and complex square roots of a polynomial. 

A set is a group of elements. A set can contain other sets. A set in a set is called a subset, meaning under the set above it, meaning one level beneath it. A superset is the set above a subset. A superset contains smaller sets. A subset in inside a superset. If we want to express infinity on a number line we use the symbol ∞. It can be –∞ for negative infinity or ∞ for positive infinity. If we wanted to graph all the numbers in existence:

∞ = 0+1+1+1…∞ we start at 0 and add 1 forever. It does not end so it not an actual finite number. 
–∞ = 0–1–1–1…–∞  we start at 0 and subtract 1 forever. It does not end so it not an actual finite number.    
Infinity is not a number but a concept. We think of something being as big as possible and say “to infinity”.
All the negative numbers are red. Moving to the left represents subtraction. 
All the positive numbers are blue. Moving to the right represents addition.
0 is neither positive nor negative. This must be proven.
If a number is positive we write it as a number. The number 4 is a positive number.
If a number is negative we write it as a number with a negative sign. The number –4 is negative.
Negative numbers are called “signed” numbers because they have a minus or negative sign in front of them.
All numbers have a quality value and a quantitative value.
The quality is whether it is positive (+) or negative (–). We use plus and minus signs to indicate quality.
The quantitative is how much or its “quantity”. 
A quantity is a number value. A sign is a quality value.

If we add move to the right. 2+3 =5 so we start at “2” and move three units to the right stopping at “5”.
If we subtract we move to the left. 5 –3 = 2 so we start at “5” and move three units to the left stopping at “2”.

People confuse the sign of the number with the sign of the operation. 
In both examples all numbers are positive quality so they have positive value.
This places emphasis on position rather than simply figuring out the final total.

The are special rules for dealing with negative numbers called “value”, “absolute value”, and “sign negation”.
There is a special rule for subtracting negatives called “canceling”. Canceling or cancellation or negation mean similar things and there are different situations when these words are applied. We cancel an operation or cancel a value among other things. For subtraction remember this rule: “Two negatives cancel”.

If 4–1 then 3, if 4 – –1 then 5.  When we have two negative signs they cancel and turn into a single plus sign.

				4 – –1		we are subtracting a negative number
				4+1		the signs cancel making a plus sign 
				5 		the answer is 5

There are exactly 8 combinations for whether you move left or right. 
The only important one is when you “subtract a negative”. Change “ ––1” to “+1”. 
In 4 – –1 there are two signs touching with no number between them. 
This is called “sign confliction”. Sign conflicts require rewriting both signs as one. 

If the signs match then add. 		If ++ or –– then add. 
If the signs do not match subtract.	If +– or –+ then subtract.

Sign conflicts only care about 1 thing: “Do I add or subtract?” which is “Do I move left or move right”.
Whatever is before the conflict is irrelevant, only the two signs, operator sign and subtrahend sign, matter.
A “minuend” is the thing to be subtracted from which the subtrahend is the thing that does the “subtracting”.
They are also both called sums: sum – sum = minuend – subtrahend.

Numbers are in ()'s
Operators are in ()'s
(positive)+(positive)	(4)+(1)	   = 5	
(positive)–(positive)	(4)–(1)	   = 3	
(positive)+(negative)	(4)+(–1)  =3	
(positive)–(negative)	(4)–(–1)  =5	
(negative)+(positive)	(–4)+(1)  =–3 
(negative)–(positive)	(–4)–(1)  =–5 
(negative)+(negative)	(–4)+(–1) =–5
(negative)–(negative)	(–4)–(–1) =–3
positive(+)positive	4(+)1	= 5
positive(–)positive	4(–)1    = 3 
positive(+)negative	4(+)–1  = 3 
positive(–)negative 	4(–)–1  = 5 
negative(+)positive   –4(+)1    = –3
negative(–)positive   –4(–)1  	= –5 		
negative(+)negative  –4(+)–1  = –5 
negative(–)negative  –4(–)–1  = –3  

Do not worry about the chart or attempt to memorize. The focus is the blue options where we cancel negatives. Later during polynomials all terms whether (–) or (+) are put in () and added using a + sign. Learn to understand why signs cancel, the difference between quality and quantity, and learn not to confuse “the sign of the operation” with the “sign of the number”. 




A positive number like 1 is written without a sign and we still know it is “positive 1”. This a “number”.
A negative number like –1 is written with a minus sign to tell us it is “negative 1”. This a “signed number”.
You have either a positive or a negative which some people call a number or a signed number.
1+1 both numbers are positive and the operation sign is positive. 
We isolate the numbers from the operation sign like this: (1)+(1) see how the operator is excluded?

4 – 1		Both numbers are positive but some people and even teachers describe this as only 4 is positive. 
(4)–(1)  	this proves both are positive because the sign is excluded.

In 4 –1 teachers think “1” is “–1” but it isn't. This confusion leads to students getting a bad intuition. 
There is a difference between “four minus one” and “four minus negative one”.

“four minus one” = “4 – 1”  		
“four minus negative one”= “4 – –1”

If you ever have trouble with any equation try writing it as an English sentence. This is an important life skill[1]. Part of math is getting the answer the other part is communicating it. Four parts:	

Learning to write the correct equation in math symbols.
Learning to solve the equation.
Learning to articulate the problem in English writing.
Learning to articulate the answer in English writing.

The chart contained 8 different situations but highlighted in red was when two negatives canceled. Combinations are found using “combinatorics”. Combinatorics would know that there are 8 choices because we have two different places, two different operators, and two different qualities. This gives us 2∙2∙2 choices or 23 which is 8.
It does not matter if you start with a negative or positive number and whether the final answer is negative or positive. The only consideration is if you are adding or subtracting from that number. This limits our choices:

1. 1+1	Adding two positives we move right there is no conflict so no signs to cancel.
2. 1–1	Subtracting a positive. There is no conflict so we move left.
3. 1+–1	Adding a negative creates conflict. The signs differ so subtract and move left on the number line. 
4. 1––1	Subtracting a negative creates conflict. The signs same so move right on the number line.
 
The rules above do not change if the sum before is negative. A sum implies a single number or subtotal.
Only negative numbers have value signs in front so that is why they are called signed.
If there is doubt group numbers with () leaving only one operator between two numbers.

1. 1+1   = (1)+(1) 		the last number is positive	1++1 →1+1 = 2
2. 1 – 1 = (1) – (1)	the last number is positive	1–+1→ 1–1 = 0  
3. 1+–1 = (1)+(–1)  	the last number is negative	1+–1→ 1–1 = 0  
4. 1– –1= (1)–(–1)	the last number is negative 	1––1→ 1+1 = 2   

These last two pages can be summed up in if signs same add and if they differ subtract but time was spent to demonstrates why and to prove whether a number is positive or negative not just what direction to move on the number line. This ends proof. ■

The black dot is used at the end of proofs so say “end of proof”.  You do not need to use both.
This proof is important because logic and Boolean operators do weird adding of 1 and – 1.

We would never encounter a situation where 1 –+1 existed because we do not write positives with a plus sign.  
If we group (1)–(+1) the + sign cancels by itself leaving (1)–(1) which is 1–1.


Proof of the neutrality of zero part 1

Before we can count we need to be sure of number value and operation quality at hand. We need to know certain things about 1 and 0 because they have special properties. This comes up later so it is a good idea to prove 0 is neutral. For this proof we need to understand variables. Variable means the number is unknown and we have to solve to find it. Example: 2+x = 17 then x= 15.

Before pre-algebra students are taught to find the missing number of an equation like 2+[  ] = 17 and write it in the brackets or a hollow square box. In algebra we but a letter there instead:

Variables
2+ [  ] = 17		we are asking “2 plus what number equals 17?”
2+ [x] = 17		for now we use the variable x as a placeholder for the true number
2+x = 17		we now erase the brackets and have our first algebra equation

How do we solve something like 2+x = 17? There are two ways: we could keep guessing until we get the right number or we could use algebra. Algebra uses methods to solve without guessing and it quicker than guessing.

Using algebra:	 					Using guessing:
2+x=17							2+[ ] = 17
2+–2+x = 17–2 					2+ 13 ≠ 17		(≠ means not equal)				
2–2+x   = 15						2+14 ≠ 17
    0+x  = 15						2+15=  17		this is right.
        x  =15	this is right

Both methods work but algebra is faster. This example used extra steps than it normally does. It is also written a certain way to show the importance of signs and the previous value sign lesson.

Taking a guess is called an estimation or approximation. When we guessed we tried to pick a number that was close to the right number. We choose 13 which was a pretty good guess since we were only off by a few. When we have a good guess it is called an “educated guess”. If we had no idea what the number was and just started from 1 it would take 15 tries to get the number 15. This is called a bad guess or rough estimate. Guessing is important for working problems you have not seen before but as you learn more algebra you guess less and use something called “formulas” to know how to find the right answer without guessing. Eliminating guesswork can save a lot of time. Let's look at that again:

1. 2+x=17				This is how a problem will look. It is asking us to “solve for x”.		
2. 2+–2+x = 17–2	 	We need to get “x” by itself. If we add 2 then we subtract 2 from both sides. 
3. 2–2+x   = 15			Remember that if signs differ change them to a single minus sign.
4. 0+x  = 15				  		
5. x  =15				We state “ x equals 15” and then check by “plugging” it into the equation.
6. 2+15 = 17			We write a 15 instead of x this time
7. 17 = 17  			Both sides are the same so it proves we had the right number


In step #2 we had 2+–2 =0. This call be moved around to –2+2= 0. 

It looks better this way because it is easier to read. See how it does not have sign conflict anymore? 
Re-arranging things is called algebraic manipulation. When you add two numbers and they equal 0 it is called “canceling under addition”.  To cancel under addition the numbers have a special name called additive inverses. An additive inverse is any number minus itself to equal zero like 7–7= 0 because – 7 and 7 are the same quantity value but opposite sign value. If we move the order we get – 7+7 =0.
Either we have 7 and subtract 7 to get 0 or; We are missing 7 and add 7 to get 0. 
Both 7– 7 = 0 and – 7+7 = 0 because they cancel. The only difference is where the start on the number line: 
   
   		       – 7+7 = Start at blue dot and add 7   or   7 –7 = Start at red dot and minus 7
					adding two opposites is called additive inverses

Proof of the neutrality of zero part 2

Anything to the left of 0 is negative and anything to the right of zero is positive. A number has to be either negative or positive to work. If not how do we know the value sign and which direction to travel?

If 0 is in the middle it has to be either both positive and negative and the signs cancel, or it has to be neither sign. 
If it is neither one then we call it neutral. 

Example #1: To make purple you make half red and half blue. Is our color both red and blue or neither red and blue? 
If we say both than we have a 50% to 50% blended color. If we say neither we have a 100% purple color. Some say it is perspective but truth is: art says 50/50 ratio and math says neither color but a new color called purple. In the real world an additive inverse creates neutrality.

Example #2: I vote in an election for two opposing candidates, the blue candidate and the red candidate.
Did it vote for both or did I vote for neither? 
Technically I did vote twice, which is both, but voting for both creates cancellation so I end up voting for neither. I neither added a “+1” to either side. So I voted for neither which being neutral. Said differently if I do not vote at all I am neutral. Whether I vote 0 times or twice the net result is the same so the verdict is the same: I am neutral. 

Example #3: Two of your friends are arguing and ask you to take sides, “Who is right?” both exclaim. 
You say, “I think you are right, and I think you are right”. Right there you maintained neutrality by not committing to either side. Any rephrasing means you are neutral because you are on the fence. This is an extension. You can not say you are on either persons side because in reality you are on neither ones side.

Example #4: A man walks into a 7-11 store and sees three flavors of Slurpee, red cherry on the left dispenser, blue raspberry on the right dispenser, and purple grape in the middle. He walks out with a purple Slurpee.  Did he order half cherry half raspberry or did he order grape?      

This is a counter example that uses sly and guile to dupe, also called sophistry or a fake proof. The problem is that it uses a tactic from statistics to lie called “mis-correlation” or “false reporting”. If the drink is purple he must have bought the purple but the problem indicates he would have to have a drink that is 50/50 with a solid color on the bottom and a solid color on the top. In proving something all it takes is one counter example to disprove your assumption, also called hypothesis or bias.

Since a counterexample has been brought we must refute it by proving it does not apply. To do that we have to investigate it by using deduction. He can not have purple unless he ordered grape. But ordering grape does not correlate to our data. Having grape means an equation that starts at zero and ends there with no operation, this does not apply in an additive inverse where must add and subtract.

Adding cherry to raspberry does not create grape but only the color purple.
Adding ½ cherry on top of ½ raspberry you can see the divide.
Adding ½ raspberry on top of ½ cherry you can see the divide.

To cancel we need to meet in the middle. This example is silly and nonsense. Adding two different flavors will not create a grape flavor nor will the colors blend like the first example from color theory. Picking grape from the middle does not show a left to right canceling operation so the data does not fit. We are given inconsistent data.

If this last statement is incorrect then an inverse did occur and this example actually corresponds with our bias that the drink in neither red nor blue but a third option that is totally independent of the two choices and therefore 0 is neutral.  

I have a drink that is half red and half blue. You will see two different colors separately. Look at the number line, is it purple? Or is is half red and half blue? 

Maybe if the flavors melted it would be a murky purple but this is a stretch. You can make some assumptions but not too many or else it will corrupt the test experiment. Further this is a stretch which means bad data so we must throw it out of our data set. However if we keep it, it is the only example that implies that 0 is both – and +.

Conclusion

Either we have 0 is neutral and that is the bias we want as math students or we have 0 is ± and that is the bias we do not want unless we are art students. Neutrality works better in the application of political science and engineering or finance or any other math intensive career. A 50/50 approach works better in art, design, literature, film, communication and other soft skills careers due to its flexibility, visual appeal, and appreciation of the nature of duality. In essence art is emotion and emotion lies and corrupts data. We do not want corrupt data. TV and news talk shows corrupt data to consider their audience plus rating and the temptation to deliver confirmation bias wins over raw data. They filter and soften data. This is called “coloring” the news just as you would color the truth. It excels at entertainment not education. Entertainment sacrifices educational value for entertainment value while education does the opposite. Nobody is going to become smart watching TV and nobody is going to be entertained going to school. Each has their own purpose.

Duality says 0 is both at the same time. The equation to back this up is x ±0 = x  where 0+x = x and –0+x =x.
Math says 0 is neither + nor – at any time. The equation to back this up is 0/–1 = 0 and 0/1 = 0. Changing signs does not change value so there is no sign to flip. The interpretation given is if you do not have a number you can not have a value for that number. 

If I point to empty air and say, “Is that dog half blue and red or is it purple?” anybody would respond “what dog? There is no dog.” and rightfully so. There is no dog so it can't be any color just as 0 has no quantitative value so it can not have a qualitative value.  

Our conclusion is 0 is not + nor – but neither.


Proof of the neutrality of zero part 3

That was a long and exhaustive journey. We learned to think critically and examine a situation from both sides not just our own bias. Now we need to actually prove 0 is neutral. Anything before was anecdotal. Examples and theory is a form of weak proof called “naive”. Naive means assumption or bias. Naive is we get the right answer, we know how to get it, but we do not know why it is the answer, it just pops up. Rigor is the opposite of naive and provides stronger foundation for thinking skills. Rigorous proof understands the what and why of the answer. 
“>” and “<” mean “more than” and “less than”.

We go to the grocery store to purchase a pound of candy. It costs $1 per pound and we need exactly 1 pound. An empty scale is balanced like an empty teeter totter. If we use a 1 pound counterweight the scale will be balanced when we have exactly 1 pound. We will use either 1 for weight or we will use 1lb as an abbreviation for pound.

We do not know how much the candy weighs so we use “c” as a variable for weight. 
We put some candy on the scale and it is too light so it is up in the air.  This means that 1lb>c.
We add more candy but it is too much so now the counterweight is up in the air. This means 1lb<c.
We remove some so that it is balanced. This means 1lb = c.

Variables can be any letter but we mostly use x,y,z or a,b,c. I used “c” to represent “candy”.
We can only know the candy weighs 1 pound when the scale is balanced. We can never know how much the candy weighed when it was too little or too much because we do not have enough information but that is okay.

Let's pretend the candy was too much and too little by the same amount. Let's be easy and use ½ lb.
For the first one candy is too little so it is missing weight. It is red because of a debt. 
Being in the red means you are negative and need more to be balanced. Adding ½ lb will fix that:  c + ½ = 1lb

For the second one we were overweight by ½lb so subtracting it will fix that:  c – ½ = 1lb
We have to use math to isolate “c”: 

c+½       = 1		oh no! It is ½ to much		and	     c – ½ = 1 		yikes! We have ½ too little
c+½–½  =1–½       	we must cancel it!			c – ½+½ = 1+½     	we must add on both sides
c            = ½ 		candy weighs ½ a pound			c = 1½ 		candy weighs 1½ pounds 	

We can not know how much the candy weighed even with algebra but we pretended to show something important. If we want to know what a variable equals we need to get it isolated by itself on one side of the equation. To isolate it we must use inverse operations to cancel what is being done.

If a number always equals itself then c = c. What if I added ½ to only one side:

c =c  		this is equal
c+½ ≠ c  	hey this is not equal someone has ½ pound more candy than us!

To be fair we should add the same to each side: c+½ = c+½. Good now they are equal. 
It does not matter we if change the order of addition as long as we add the same amount to both sides.
Because 1 +2 = 2+1 order does not matter. This is called the commutative property. In addition and multiplication you can change the order of the numbers and the answer is same. 4∙3 = 3∙4 because they both equal 12. When we make two equations equal each other it is called an equivalence. We are saying they are the same amount.     

“c+½ = ½+c” because “c+½ = c+½”. As long as we add the same amount on both sides of the order can change. Let's look at our two original equations:

c + ½ = 1		c has ½ added so we must subtract ½ on both sides of the equation.
c + ½ –½ = 1 –½	subtracting ½ on both sides will cancel on the left and maintain balance on the right. 
c = ½			when there are no more operations we are done. This candy is ½ a pound.			 

c – ½ = 1 		c has ½ being subtracted so we must add ½ on both sides (of the equation).
c –½ +½ = 1+½      	we added
c = 1.5			we simplified our answer by canceling

When there are no more operations to perform we say our answer is in most “simplified form”. Every step of an equation we solve it by slowing doing operations. Every step the answer is more simple. When we are done we have the most simplified and we call that simplified form. Most answers are expected to be presented in simplified form. 
If we have c+½ = 1 and c – ½ = 1 both c's have different value. When using a variable more than once in the same equation they have to have the same value or else they are not equal and it ruins your equation. Here we have two different equations so it is okay but we should keep track of which one is which by saying something like “candy #1” and “candy #2”. One way to do this is use two different variables like x and y but since both were candy let's use subscripts; let c1 = ½ and c2 = 1.5. 

Subscripts are a way of numbering variables or term
s in an equation. A term is a number separated from another number by operators as in an equation or commas as in a series.  A subscript is pronounced “sub” so c1 = ½ would be “c sub  1 equals one half”. Or you can just say “c one and c two” for c1 and c2.

We notice that we are either adding ½ to 1 or subtracting ½ from 1. We write this with  c = 1 ± ½ which means “plus or minus”. The symbol is called the “plus or minus” sign. It is a compound operator than means you have two answers. Let's show this with a number line.

We see we can be equally far from 1 pound in either direction and
that adding or subtracting ½ will make make ½ and 1.5 equal 1. 

					Proof of the neutrality of zero part 4
 
When the candy on the scale is too light it needs to to add ½ a pound. 
We write – ½ to indicate the debt we are short. When we are over by ½ we have a surplus written as +½.

If we balance the scale we are neither –½ nor +½. We are said to have a net zero balance. We are nothing ahead nor nothing behind. This translates to neither positive nor negative. Anything to the left of 0 is in the red negative debt and anything to the right of 0 is a positive surplus.

A surplus means “with plus sign”. We are at 0 so do not have a surplus so do not have a debt so we are neutral. There is nothing added so not positive there nothing taken so no negative. ■





















Property Laws
The Property Laws use letters like a or b or c to mean any three numbers that are not the same. Using letters in place of numbers is called using variables. Variables are very important in used in every algebra problem. In fact variables is what separates algebra from arithmetic. These laws are taken directly from the glossary at the beginning of the book.

Negation: Negation means reversing an operation or taking the opposite of something. Subtraction negates or is the negation of addition. By multiplying by a -1 we can negate terms of equations (indeed the entire equation itself) to be the opposite of sign of what it already is. This is useful simplifying and reducing equations to make them cleaner looking or easier to solve.

Properties: Properties are rules that dictate how order of operations should behave and what is permissible when reordering terms to restructure an equation. Properties show an how the numbers behave and interact with each other on a foundational level as opposed to simply solving for an answer. Understanding and having innate sense of properties shows an advanced mastery of mathematics and goes beyond superficial plugging in of values to get a result. You know how the numbers behave conceptually rather then mechanically.

Additive identity property: For any number a,  a+0 = a. This states that 0 does not change the value.
 
Multiplicative identity property: For any number a, a·1 = 1·a. 

Multiplicative property of zero:  For any number a, a·0 = 0·a. This states that the order of terms is irrelevant and moving them around does not change the answer. [In addition any number times zero is zero. Further diving by zero is undefined. It is undefined since dividing by zero does not give us non zero factor.] 

Properties of equality: The following properties are true for any a, b, or c. 
Reflexive:  a = a
Symmetric: if a = b then b = a. This just restates substitutive property twice.
Transitive: if a = b and b = c then a = c.
Substitutive: if a = b then a may be replaced by b. This just restates the symmetric property.

Distributive property: For any numbers a, b, c:

a (b + c) = ab + ac   and    (b + c) a = ba + ca 
a (b – c) = ab –  bc   and    (b – c) a = ba – ca     

To remove parenthetical terms you must use multiplication by the factor outside the parentheses, in this case “a”. If there is no factor then multiply by “1” to cancel the parentheses. If there is a minus sign infront of the parenthetical then you must multiply every term inside by –1. This inverts all signs of the terms (sign flipping) changing them to there additive inverses: 5(x+2) = 5x+10 	–5(x+2) = –5x – 2     –(5x+3x–4) becomes –5x–3x+4.

Commutative property:  This states that the order of terms is irrelevant and moving them around does not change the answer for addition and multiplication. 2∙3/4 is same as 3∙2/4 , 2∙¾ , 3∙ ½.   

Associative property: For any numbers a, b, c (a + b) + c = a + (b + c) and (ab) c = a (bc). It says that if you change the grouping for + or ÷ the result is the same.

The next page has naive definitions for laws that work a give a gentle introduction. 
After Counting Basics the truth is told in detail. I give instruction at a blend of rigor and approachability.
Law of powers:
30 = 1			Any numbers raised to zero equals 1.
31 = 3		           Any number raised by 1 equals itself.
32 = 9		           A number squared is itself times itself. 3·3 = 9. There are two base factors.
33 = 27			A number cubed is three factors of itself multiplied.

31  =  3    		The exponent tells how many bases to times.
32  =  3 · 3    		
33   =  3 · 3 ·3 		 
34  =  3 · 3 · 3 · 3	

Sometimes the exponent is blank and has a empty box to fill in or nth for the exponent. 2nth means number like “1st  2nd …nth” . We are saying a number in a series. If 34 = bnth and plug in b=3 and nth= 4.

Formula for powers:
 bnth = 1· (b · b, “nth times”) where b is the base and nth is the power. Write b nth times and multiply to find the power of b. Power can mean either the exponent or value of b raised to the power of nth. 

Example: If 34 = 81 then 4 is “the power 3 is raised to” or “the exponent of  3 is 4” . 81 is “the power of 34”.  

Using power to describe both the result and exponent is confusing; nonetheless:
(23 · 3) =  3·2·2·2= 24 because (3,6,12,24) are multiples of 3. A multiple is repeated addition of a base number.
 33             =  3·3·3·3= 81 because (3,9,27,81) are powers of 3. Powers are repeated multiplication

Power is the total value of the expression not just the power it is raised to. This is ambiguous but how it is.
When multiples of a number are the result of a power operation they are called powers of the base.
Sometimes we say things like “100 is the square of 10” but we also say “100 is the second power of 10”.  We say 9 is a power of 3, 27 is a power of 3, 81 is a power of 3.

This is the law of negative powers:
The law of powers states that the negative sign in front of the power negates the multiplication by inducing division of 1 using the the power as the divisor.  To find a negative power, write the power as a denominator with one as the numerator.  	34 = ⅓-4  and 3-4 = ⅓4 as they are reciprocal.

Writing power as the denominator with 1 as the numerator: 3-1 = ⅓	3-2 = ⅑		3-3 = ⅟27 

Since we know the power of the base we simply write it as a fraction under 1. So if you can find the power of a number then you will know it's negative power. Why and how does this work?
Negative powers are the negation of positive powers.


Negation here means reversing an operation. We are NOT multiplying by a negative number. Since powering a number means multiplying by groups, then it's negation must mean dividing by groups. This is why no power can be a negative number unless it is imaginary. ( i2 = -1).



Laws of negation:
Multiplication negates division and visa versa. A negation is an “undoing”; adding is the negation of  subtraction.
2· 3 = 6
6 ÷ 3 = 2  or				division undoes multiplication
6 · ⅓ = 2				multiplying by the reciprocal divides (undoing multiplication)

27+3= 30
30- 3 = 27 or	30 + (-3) = 27		subtraction undoes addition or negating by adding a negative sum

Special cases
10+1= 11				
-(10+1) = -11				negating a positive sum by multiplying by -1	

Usually we simplify math by negating negative sums so we can add the difference. This gives the absolute value. Absolute value is always positive. Use as a positive or negative as situation warrants.

0 –10 –1 = ?  
-(0 –10 –1)			writing in () to isolate negation sign on the outside
0 + 10 + 1(-)			flipping signs by multiplying each term by -1
  11(-)				summation of terms
- 11                                         negating the positive back to a negative so sign is not lost

It is important when negating problems using absolute value for ease calculation you put the minus sign in parentheses so that you do not forget the original sign of the equation. If you want to use a positive value you stop at 11(-) but you must have the sign there. If you need to convert the answer back it's original form having the sign properly isolated so you can keep track of your negations is critical.

93 – 100					a negative sum
–(93 –100) 	 =  (– 93 +100)(–1) 		distributing the sum out flips the signs
(100 – 93)(–1)	 = 7(–1)			writing as (100 – 7)(–1)  

Negation is useful for removing negative operators so that equations can be simplified. When all like terms are combined you change the sign of the answer to show the actual value.


The negation of negative powers:
Negating a power means to turn a power into it's reciprocal. A reciprocal is what ever multiplied to it makes it equal one. The reciprocal of any whole number is it's fractional opposite. 5 shares reciprocity with ⅕ because  5 · 0.2 = 1. Written fractionally it is  5/1 · 1/5  = 5/5. Reducing by dividing by 5 makes it   1/1.  both 5/5   and  1/1  equal 1. any number divided by itself equals 1. 

If we are undoing the negative of a power we have to use its reciprocal:
 3-4                        							a negative power
1 · ⅓ · ⅓ · ⅓ · ⅓						expanded out using reciprocal notation
1 · 1/81 								multiplying
1/81								the reciprocal of  81/1

81 · 1/81 = 1 so they are  reciprocal. Also note that (81/1 · 1/81) = 1. This is true for any number.


The law of reciprocals:
 For any non zero number a,   a/1 · 1/a = 1 and -a,  -a/1 · -1/a = 1. A reciprocal the number that multiplies to 1.

The law of negative factors:
Negative sums having an even number of terms multiplied equals a positive sum always. For any non zero numbers -a · -b = ab. Negative sums having an odd number of terms multiplied equals a negative sum always. For any non zero numbers -a · b = -ab.

If you have three terms all with negative signs the two negative signs cancel out making the sum positive but the third sign negates it and your sum is negative. 

If you have four terms with all negative signs they all cancel out making the sum positive. When two numbers have a negative sign it cancels out leaving the product positive. Each pair of negative terms cancel out their (-) so if you have an even number of negative terms the sum will always be positive. If you have an odd number of terms the sum will be negative because the last term is negating it. 

Two negatives equal a positive:
You can only multiply two numbers at a time. With 5 numbers to be multiplied You start at the left of the expression and multiply the first two terms creating a new product with four left over. You multiply that with the third term creating a newer product leaving fourth and fifth term. You multiply your product with the fourth term and the product of that with the last term. This is the full meaning of the above.

 -3 · -3 · -3 · -3 · -3				– 35  
        9  · -3 · -3 · -3				multiplying...
             -27 · -3 ·-3		     		multiplying...
                   81  · -3				multiplying...
	            -243 				final product

We performed four multiplication operations using five terms which created four products. Our products were 
(– 3, 9, -27, 81, – 243). The first two terms canceled out the signs. Each additional operation changed the sign from positive to negative. Since we had an odd number of terms the first four canceled out the signs and the last term negated it making it a negative.

-30   =         1 					 –3/– 3				
-31  =       -3					 (-3) 			
-32  =         9					 (-3 · -3) 
-33  =     -27					 (-3 · -3 · -3)
-34  =       81					 (-3 · -3 · -3 ·  -3)
-35  =   -243					 (-3 · -3 · -3 · -3 · -3)

A negative raised to a negative:
-3-1 =   -⅓					( –3/ –3 ∙ –3)           because (–31)/(–32)   is  –31-2   then  –3-1 = –⅓
-3-2 =    ⅑					(-⅓)2   	                   because –3-1 = –⅓                  then  –3-2 = –⅓∙– ⅓  
-3-3 =   -⅟29 					(-⅓ · -⅓ · -⅓)	 	

Write the power under a fraction bar and use 1 as the numerator. Numerator is the top number and denominator is the bottom number. The answer of a division operation is called the quotient. A fraction is a division problem. Also (dividend ÷ divisor =quotient) if strictly speaking division and not fractions.

In  “ -3-3 = -⅟29 ”   it's factors are (-⅓, -⅓, -⅓). Taking a fraction of a fraction will make it smaller. When we are raising a number to a negative power that is what we are doing. We are dividing by groups of the base. 

-3-1 =   -⅓					(-0.33333)  	 	– a third
-3-2 =    ⅑					(0.111111) 	    	+ a third of a third
-3-3 =   -⅟29 					(-0.0370370)   	– a third of a third of a third

Adding powers
32 + 33  32+3 			Adding the exponent in the superscript area multiplies instead of adds
32 + 33 =   9 + 27		The terms are separated by the add sign making them discrete quantities

Raising to a power, expanding, the expansion of are all ways to say the final value of the exponential term. Expansion can mean writing out in expansion notation like (3 · 3 · 3 · 3 · 3) or solving like 243.

Subtracting powers
321 - 33 = 321-3 				Add the exponent in the superscript area
321-3 						
318					combine the exponents 
10,460,353,203				expand to solve

Exponential means that the bigger the exponent you larger the interval between powers become. A version of exponential notation is used to write very large numbers called scientific notation. This bakes the number and reduces it to the ones unit with a limited number of decimals and then writes ten multiply sign in front of it with powers of ten being used to represent the length of the sum.

Multiplying powers
33 · 33				standard form
33 +3				grouping
36				multiplying the exponents as factors to get a productive
729				simplifying

36
(3 ·3 · 3 · 3 · 3· 3)		write out all your bases so you can easily times them.
(9 · 9 · 9) or (27·27) 		multiply by grouping pairs and squaring
(81 · 9)    or	  729	
				
Do not Multiply different bases by adding exponents:
4a2 · 4b2  can not be simplified any further adding exponents since a  b. Since the base is different you would be grouping together different groups of groups.  

4a2 · 4b2   =  4(32) · 4(22) ≠ 16 (ab4) because a2b2 ≠ ab4 the mistake is adding exponents of “base a to base b”. 
	     
a2b2 ≠ ab4 			     
3222 ≠ 3∙24        			    is right but coefficients need to be multiplied
9∙4 ≠  3∙8       			    is right	(does equal 4a24b2 ) 

3n2 · 7n2  can simplified further since they have the same number of variables raised to the same power. If bases are different you would be grouping together different groups of groups. If the same variables are raised to the same power they are called like terms. 

Both the variables have to match and the powers have to match to be like terms.  4x+4 can not be simplified further. We can write them to have the same base but power would be different. For 4x1 +4x0  ≠ 4x1 because 4x+4≠ 4x. Any constant has a variable base raised to a power of 0 which makes the variable equal 1, which makes the term any constant times 1, which cancels and you are left with the original constant. 
4x+4				These can not be added together because their variable bases have different powers.
4x+4 				have the same variable because we can write them as 4x+4x0
4x+4x0				we are going to make x0 cancel 
4x+4∙x0				raise the power first then multiply by the coefficient (follow pemdas)
4x+4∙1 				x0= 1 following the zero power law
4x+4				we can not write these as one sum or term. We must write as two terms

 3n2 · 7n2			We will use n = 5
 3(52) · 7(52)			substitution or substituting or substituted or substitute 
 3(25) · 7(25)			expansion or expanding or expanded or expand
 75 · 175			distribution or distributing or distributed or distribute 
 13125				simplification or simplifying or simplified or simplify  

English has four different tenses for math words. These will come up. You are not limited in how you express math. I am going to prefer the simplest versions highlighted in blue but may use other versions to show process. It is important to learn math and English at the same time so you can read and count. I want literacy in both.

1. 3n2 · 7n2			stating a product as two factors
2. 21(n4)				combining like terms
3. 21(54)				substitute
4. 21(625)				simplify 
5. 13125				distribute
6. 3n2 · 7n2  = 21n4		equate

Find like terms. 3n2   and  7n2 are like because they share the same base of n2.

3n2 · 7n2
(3·7) · (n2 · n2)		multiply your constants ( the coefficient 3 and 7)
(21) · (n2 · n2)		multiply your variables (the bases n2 and n2)  
(21) · (n2+ 2 )		add to multiply exponents
(21) · (n4)	
21n4			this is as simple as we can make it because there are no more operations left

[1]The part about writing your problem as an English sentence applies to non math as well. Before you can solve a life problem you need to define it first. Writing makes people smarter and focus more. It stimulates brain growth. Identify your problem, isolate it, then solve it. This works for all math and life problems. Write out your problems identifying what they really are, what causes them, and what steps you can do to solve them. Make a list of possible solutions then be honest and list the pros and cons for each solution. If you do not do this you will not ever change your predicament. If you are not honest it defeats the purpose. The truth does not care about your feelings and telling yourself what you want to hear is lazy and foolish. If you lie you are in denial. Feelings and emotion create bias that clouds judgment. Notice how your feelings prevent you from accepting what is right for you. Be fair and accept how you really feel but do not let that prevent you from making clear and sound decisions. Recognize bias and make sure you can function and treat people reasonably or else you are not really doing math but pseudo math. We use this in ethics and statistics to apply a fair culture of learning and working with the benefit of all members of society.


Radicals: The inverse operation of a power is called a radical. 
To negate a power you root it to find it's square. The radical sign looks looks like “ √ ”. We are dividing in groups to reverse the multiplying in groups we did when we raised a number to a power.

Like long division the large number, called a power, is put inside a box. A line called a vinculum is used to show what numbers are inside the box to be rooted. The process of finding a root is called rooting and a root is some factor of the power that we are trying to find. 


						Rooting process
1. √4				find the square root of 4.
2. √1 · 4				look for factors of 4 that equal 4 when squared	
3. √1·2·2				write prime factorization
4. 2∙√1·2·2			strikeout two matching factors then write the factor once to the left of “√”
5.  2∙√1			            remove canceled factors
6. 2				multiply remaining factor with remaining radical 

						explanation
1. write the radical
2. determine what power of root you are taking
3. write the prime factorization of the radicand (product) or write a division tree to find factors
4. write you see 2 matching factors (“pairs of squares”) cancel both and write 1 of them on the outside
5. simplify by writing the problem without the canceled “squares”. A square is two matching factors like 2∙2.
6. multiply any outside factors to each other. Then multiply that complex factor to radical
7. at step 5 all squares should be pulled out. If there is anything left inside that is a “remainder”.
8. At step 5 you should have all squares on the outside as 1 product, and all remainders on the inside as 1 product.
9. It should look like “product√product ”where:
 product is the product of all factors pulled out of the radical. 
 product is the product of all factors remaining inside of the radical. 
10. If there is nothing left inside radical other than “1” then is your answer is product because √1 cancels.
11. If there is something left inside radical then product√product is your answer
12. √4 = √2∙2 = 2√1 = 2∙1 = 2	the square root of √1 = 1 because 1∙1 = 12 =1. Multiplication by 1 cancels.
13. 2√1 is 2∙√1	a number outside the radical is multiplying with it and any other factors pulled out.
14. If we have a number other than “1” inside radical it is left behind. Answer is product∙√leftovers .
 
Tree method
√49					We need to find the root of 49
      7 · 7				these are the only factors of 49 so 72 = 49 ...
7=√49	                                               The square root of 49 is 7.

The number inside the box being rooted is called the radicand. We make a tree under the radicand to find it's factors. When we find the number that when properly powered gives us the root we are looking for we write it infront of the radical sign. When a radical with does not have any numbers outside it we only look for the square root. When a number has a 3 or 4 outside it we look for the cube or fourth root respectively.

3√27							We need to find the cubic root of 27					
     3 · 3 · 3 = 27					these are the only factors of 27... 33 = 27
							
3 = 3√27						The cube of 27 is 3

4√625							The four means find the fourth root
    1 · 625												
    1 · ? · ?						finding factors... 
625 does not divide evenly by 2. We look at the ones unit and see that it is a five so 2 can can not be a factor of it. 
2 only works as a factor for even numbers and this one is odd. Hmm... we try the next number up which is 3...

625 ÷ 3 = 200 + (25 ÷ 3). Mentally using long division we can see that 3 goes into 6 twice removing the hundreds unit leaving us with 25. 25 does not divide evenly by 3. When we look for a factor and the number we are using does not divide evenly we go to the next number up. We start with the lowest factor of 1 and the radicand itself and then go up sequentially until we find a number that divides evenly.

625 ÷ 3 = 208⅓ 			3 will not work
625 ÷ 4 = 156.25			4 will not work 
625 ÷ 5 = 125				5 will work so we put that into of tree of factors

4√625
    5 · 125				we must now factor the largest number on the right
    5 · 5 · 25 				we know that 52 = 25 so lets see what is happening
    5 · 5 · 5 · 5				we have fully factored 625 and found two perfect squares

 5   4√625     				5 is the fourth root of 625.

So what is meant by perfect square? A square is two matching factors. 
		
4√625
    (25)(25)				notice that 25 is the power of 52. This is a perfect square.
    (5 · 5) · (5 · 5)			finding perfect squares will make factoring easier.

These examples were just to show concept and process. You can find the root to any number if you make a large enough tree. Often people just use a calculator as they do not have paper handy. Also any number can be raised to a power and it will be a whole number that is positive but finding the root of a power usually leaves an irrational neverending fraction. Between 1 and 2 there are infinite irrational numbers so it is not weird for then to occur it is weird for them not too. Look at number line below.



There are neverending numbers, both rational and irrational between and two numbers. The ancient Greek Zeno, in his Zeno's Paradox, famously theorized about numbers and asked the question how long it would take to reach something if each step you took was half as big as the last. Half the distance from 0 to 1 is ½ . To halve the distance you divide by 2. Doing so makes each number smaller than the last. Your current interval is half as big as your last and twice as big as your next. At this rate you will never reach 0 from 1. If this was a negative exponent your denominator would be keep going until you reached 1/∞ ( 1 over infinity). †To make the imperial fractions irrational adding a 1 the ones unit in the denominator would do it. This is a big topic in math.






Bigger easy radicals
Tree method by 2's:

 √1024    				need to find what x equals x2 = 1024
   2 · 512				because this is an even radicand we can always factor out 
   2 · 2 · 256				as long as our factor is even we can keep factoring out 2
   2 · 2 · 2 · 128				factoring by 2 keeps the process simple...
   2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 64
   2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 32			we can keep doing this but it is getting excessive
   2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 16...		we need to still factor 16	



When you have this many common factors there is likely to be a square. 
Instead of factoring 16 all the way down like:

2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 8
2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 4
2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 · 2 ·2

Then solving by finding pairs of common factors and squaring like: 

(2 · 2) · (2 · 2) · (2 · 2) · (2 · 2) · (2 ·2) = 4·4·4·4·4 = 16 · 16 · 4   then

16 · 16 · 4        					We have two squares and a 4. Factor the 4. 
16 · 16 · 2 · 2 					Rearrange the 2's to pair them with the squares.
(16 · 2) · (16 · 2)				multiply
32 · 32						Since 32 · 32 = 322 , 32 is the root of 1024
  32 = √1024                                                  
  
We could do that but there was a shortcut that we missed. 
We should have grouped the 2's when the biggest factor was 64 or grouped them as we went.

√1024     				need to find what x equals x2 = 1024
   2  · 512					
   4  · 256				
   8  · 128			
  16 · 64	
  32 · 32				multiplying the 2's gives a pair of 32 . We have two perfect squares.

Both methods work. The first one took sixteen steps and the second one took five. Use a combination of both methods to get your answer. Start by taking out factors of two until you see a pattern and can solve by instinct. The more you practice patterns become familiar and you will recognize more pairs of factors of high level powers.

Making trees of factors to group or sum is called recursion. Recursion is used heavily in computer programming and other high level math. It is based on shapes and patterns. Each time you group pairs from rows or columns you are performing a recursive action. Minowski's triangle is a type of recursion and we will study it later. The staircase problem seen earlier with the series formula was also a recursion action to group the 12 elements into 6 pairs for summation and then further multiplying.




Root notation has four parts
1. Root index		The root index is how many times the root is multiplied.
2. radical symbol		The radical symbol is the check symbol with a bar under the radicand.
3. Radicand		The radicand is the number (product) inside the radical symbol.
4. solution or root	The root is the solution to the expression. It is the simplified answer.

When we square root a number we are taking the second root. We don't write a number two in the index. We write it as:√4 = 2 but we could write it as “2”√4 = 2. The superscript “2” is telling us to take the second root.

Taking the root of a number is the inverse operation of powering a number.
When we power we are multiplying by groups of the same number. 

22 = 2·2 = 4		We have two groups of 2.
23 = 2·2·2 = 8		We have three groups of 2. The number of groups is the exponent or index.

Power operations are spoken as “Two squared equals 4” or “Two cubed equals 8” . We are powering, or raising to a power. This is also called expanding. We say “expand” when we want to solve a power. A power is solved when it is written as a single number raised to a power of 1. 22 = 41. Anything to a power of 1 equals itself.

Powering takes a number and makes it larger.  
Rooting takes a number and makes it smaller.

In 23 we have a base of two with a power of two. Having a power of 2 means we write the exponent 3 in the index of the expression. For powers, index means the area in which we write the exponent. For roots, index means the area in which we write the exponent.

In 22 we have a base of 2 and are raising to a power of 2.
In 23 we have a base of 2 and are raising to a power of 3.

2√4 = 2 	The square root of 4 is 2. 
∛8 = 2		The cube root of 8 is 2. The index of the expression is 3.
∜16 = 2	The fourth root of 16 is 2. The index of the expression is 4.

For any number raised to a power:
When you have a power multiply the base by the same number of groups as the power.
When you have a power of 0 x equals 1 unless you have 00 which is undefined.
When you have a power of 1 it equals itself.
When you have a fractional power the numerator is the power and the base is the root of the index.
41/2  is the same as √4.    	 41/2   1 is the power of 4 and you must take the second root. 
41/3 is the same as 3√4.   	 41/3  1 is the power of 4 and you must take the third root.
42/3 is the same as 3√4^2. 	 42/3 2 is the power of four and you must take the third root.

In 42/3 the exponent is 2/3. 
2 is written as the power of the radicand.
3 is written as the root index.

23 = 8
3√8 = 2
82/3 = 3√8^2 = 3√64 = 4.  4 is the third root of 64. 
82/3 =4. 4 is the two thirds power of 8.
21.5 = 21 +0.5 = 21 ·20.5 = 2 · 21/2 = 2·√2 = 2√2.
2√2 is the simplest form. I can not reduce it any further.
The Laws of Exponents
~Skip any formula notation until you understand variables and formulas~                                                            The letters x and y are used in place of a number. For now focus on what operation is being performed.
1. Multiplication Law (same bases): xaxb = xa+b		add exponents
2. Division Law (same bases):        xa/xb = xa-b			subtract exponents			
3. Power Law:(xa)b= xab						multiply exponents
4. Multiplication Law (same powers): xaya = (xy)a		multiply exponents
5. Division Law (same powers): xa/ya = (x/y)a			subtract exponents
6. Negative exponents Law :x0/xb=x0-b=x-b = 1/xb		subtract exponents
7. Fractional exponents Law: x1/n = n√x			subtract exponents
7a.Rational denominator law: 1/√x =1x^0/x^-1 = (√x)-1 = √x/x	conjugate fraction to rationalize denominator  

What does it mean to have a power of – 1? 	To drop 1 power from “power zero” using division.
What does it mean to have a power of 0?    	To drop a power from a power of 1 using division.

When you power you multiply by a factor of the same value as the base. The exponent is how many factors you are multiplying. If x3 then x∙x∙x, if x2 then x∙x, if x5 ÷ x then x5-1 = x4. When dividing by the same base you subtract powers, this is called dropping powers or dropping a power. In x5 ÷x we drop 1 power of x, in x5 ÷x2 we drop two powers. In geometry raising or lowering powers is called losing or gaining dimensionality. 

103 = 1000		10∙10∙10			23 = 8	 	2∙2∙2		x3 = x∙x∙x
102 =100		10∙10				22 = 4		2∙2		x2 = x∙x
101 = 10		10				21 = 2		2		x1 = x
100 = 1			10/10				20 = 1		2/2		x0 = x/x = 1
10-1 = 1/10		10/10∙10 or 10/102		2-1 = 1/2	2/2∙2		x-1 = x/x2 = 1/x
10-2 = 1/100		10/10∙10∙10 or 10/103		2-2 = 1/4	2/2∙2∙2 		x-2 = x/x3 = 1/x2
10-3 = 1/1000		10/10∙10∙10∙10 or 10/104	2-3 = 1/8	2/2∙2∙2∙2	x-3 = x/x4 = 1/x3

This proves the law of the zero-ith power and the law of negative exponents for all x. It also gives a better intuition and pattern for why instead of only stating it as a fact and moving on. 
Positive and negative powers are reciprocals of each other.

At its core exponentiation is simply multiplication of a repeated factor called the base or root.
To justify x0 = 1 first consider when a product equals 1. Only through reciprocity and the subsequent division does a product equal 1. A number times its reciprocal equals 1 as a product, stated simply as 
“a number divided by itself equals 1”. The only time a product equals 1 is when you perform a reciprocal operation, and every reciprocal operation simplifies to a number being divided by itself.

reciprocity = number divided by itself = 1
x∙1/x 	       = x/x   		              = 1		
10∙1/10         = 10/10                             	  = 1
7∙1/7 	       = 7/7 	                          = 1

(+)exponents are multiplicative and (–)exponents are divisive

x2 = x∙x 		2 groups of x. In geometry this is a perfect square.
x1 = x 			1 group of  x. In geometry this is a line.
x0 = 1 			1 group divided by 1 group is x/x. 
x-1 = x/x2 = 1/x	1 group divided by two groups
x-2 = x/x3 = 1/x2 	pattern continues...
 
Fractional exponents are simply a notation convention for writing radicals without √ symbol. 

It tells the person what operation to be performed and in what order.
If we want to take a first, second, third, fourth, or higher root we use a “1 over” fractional exponent.

x1/1 =  1√x  = x		a first root is simply the number itself
x1/2 =  2√x  = √x 	a second root is a square root
x1/3 =  3√x  		a third root is a cubic root
x1/4 =  4√x   	 	a fourth root is a quaternion or hyperbolic root

Higher roots have Latin names or simply use ordinal names.

Names are used ubiquitously and this causes confusion over when and what someone is referring. Base and root mean the same thing but root can mean exponent if doing a radical operation. Power can refer to the exponent, the product or the entire term. 

42 = 16 is of the form:  Baseexponent = Product where the exponent is written in the index area in superscript. 
Here we would call the base the root but base is clearer. It is being multiplied so is getting bigger.

 2√16 = 4 is the form:  exponent√Product = Base where the exponent is written in the index area of the radical sign and the product is called the radicand but product is clearer. A product is the result of multiplication. Here the product is being divided so it is in red meaning it is getting smaller.

Here we would call the exponent the “second root” or “square root”. Square roots omit the number two, higher roots than 2 write the number of the root. First roots are not really a thing.  Calling the exponent the “root” is normal but calling it the exponent might be clearer. The base is actually the root of the product so if saying root you can refer to either the exponent or base. The “index” can refer to the area an exponent is or usually the exponent itself. Saying exponent is clearer. I would always use the labels as written because however odd sounding to some people there is no ambiguity. 

There are other eccentric vocabulary and naming conventions but they all stem from lack of clarity leading to more and more made up words that serve to cause more confusion than eliminate it.

xa/b     : is of the form: Baseexponent/root , it is this form that contains fractional exponents that we will work on.
161/2  : means to take the square root of 16, √16 = 4
√16  : the radical sign omitted the exponent 2. When there is no exponent take a square root.
 81/3  : means to take the cubic root of 8.  
∛8   : the radical sign has an exponent of 3 in the index so we take the third root, ∛8=2.

The exponents ½ and ⅓ are fractions. The top number is the power of the base number, and the bottom number is the power of the radical operation. In ½ the 2 means to take a square root and in ⅓ the 3 means to take a third root. In “ Baseexponent/root ” we have a base, raised to a power, and then are told to take a root of that “Baseexponent ”.

We can take as high or low a root as we want. For fractional exponents there is an algorithm where one part of the fraction powers the base and the other part powers the rooting process. The numerator is the exponent of the product while the denominator is the exponent of the radical operation, it is the number of roots to take.

41/2 the base “4” has a exponent of 1. The “2” is the number of roots to take. We raise 4 to a power of 1 and then take the second root of it: 41/2 = 2√41 = √4 = 2.

When square rooting we do not write 2 in the index of the radical.
When product or other number has a power of 1 we do not write 1 in the index of the number.
24 = 2∙2∙2∙2 = 16	2 to the fourth power is 16. There are four factors of the base “2”.
√16 = 4		The square root of 16 is 4. Here we are calling 4 a “root” of 16.
4√16 = 2		The fourth root of 16 is 2. 2 is a base or root of 16. It means the same thing.

Since  2∙2∙2∙2 = 16 there are four roots of base 2. The base is the factor and four factors means four roots means taking a fourth root will give 2 as an answer. 

Fractional exponents that do not have 1 as a numerator require calculating the product of the radicand and then taking a root.

43/2 = 8 because we are taking the square root of 43.

43/2  = 2√43 = √64 = 8 

43/2 = 8		The square root of four cubed is 8

Most times fractional exponents can lead to irrational roots/bases just like regular square roots can. The difference is that it is easier to find rational roots of  products of integer exponents. 

132/3  we need to first square 13 and then take its 3rd root: 

132/3 = 3√132 = 3√169 ≈ 5.529		The number is irrational so use an approximation sign.



The highlight of arithmetic is learning the six operations and being able to solve any problem that uses +–∙÷^√ . 
This is the end of arithmetic. Next subjects have focused highlights:

1. Algebra: Variables, Functions, Graphing, Matrices, Sigma notation, and the Quadratic Formula
2. Geometry: Unit Circle and area formulas
3. Trigonometry:   Sine, Cosine, Tangent,Cosecant, Secant, Cotangent functions
4. Calculus: 	Derivatives and Integrals


End note
We do not do math to work a job or solve equations for glory or fun. This isn't about “gold stars” or bragging rights. We do them to think critically and train our mind to solve problems with creative solutions. We apply what we learn in the classroom to life. We bridge the gap between book smarts and street smarts. We learn to think critically and efficiently to handle life's problems. I do not want 30 students in unison to repeat a single answer. I want 30 students with 30 answers that all all equally applicable. I want diversity in thought and action. I do not want conformity. There is more than one way to derive a solution. Methods matter and some are better than others. Some are better for certain situations. It is all weighing all options and considering the best solution for your situation not someone else's. You need to have freedom to choose your own path in life. 

After completing all lesson students should be able to solve life problems that are not numerical in nature.
Please try not to boil current events down to a single equation but rather focus on analogy and perspective.
Life can be reduced to a single sum of variables but that can be abusive and harmful. The power of math is being able to do that but ethics dictates that people use what they know to help themselves and others not zero sum destruction. If you do not benefit from this style of teaching find better uses of your time. I respect your time and do not want to waste your resources. This not a democracy but it is not a dictatorship either. This style serves a need and will not be altered.



Polynomials

Definition: Two or more numbers that can not be reduced to a single sum, as a result of variables.
Etymology: Poly-nomials means many-numbers like poly-gon means many-sides.

Polynomials are numbers containing variables separated by + or – signs. A constant has a constant value that does not change, 2 always equals 2, as is 2 = 2. Constants like 0, 1, 2 or 3 and variables like x, y, z are monomials. Monomials have one term. A binomial has two terms. If a quantity can be simplified to a single term then it is a monomial, if it cannot then it is a polynomial. Binomial is “two monomials separated by a + or – ”.

From earlier:						Variables
2+ [  ] = 17		we are asking “2 plus what number equals 17?”
2+ [x] = 17		for now we use the variable x as a placeholder for the true number
2+x = 17		we now erase the brackets and have our first algebra equation

The “2+x” is called a binomial and the 17 is a constant. A regular number is a constant and a constant or variable is a monomial. A constant has the same value constantly no matter the equation and a variable has different values that vary from equation to equation. A variable varies from number to number and a constant does not.

Constant = 1							a constant is just a number
variable = x							a variable is a letter in place of an unknown number
mixed term= 2x						a mixed term has a constant in front of a variable.
binomial= 2x +1						two terms separated by operators + or –. 	
trinomial = x2 +x + 5						two terms separated by operators + or –. 
polynomial with four terms = x3 + x2 +x + 5			four term polynomial 
polynomial with five terms = x4 + x2 + 2x +x + 5		five term polynomial 	

Cookie story:


I have a cookie		I dropped it, oh no! 
				It broke into three pieces.		
				How much is each piece?	
				I don't really know...



When we don't know we use a variable. When we have to add variables that can not be a single number because we write it like “piece 1 = piece 2 + piece 3” and then get fancier and use letters “piece A + piece B + piece C”.
We have three pieces and say a+b+c = 1 cookie. Each piece is some fraction that is a mystery for now.

From earlier: 2+x = 17 is another way of saying “17 – 2 = ?”

17 – 2 = ?		a subtraction problem
17 – 2 = x		replace a blank spot with a variable, x is convenient
15 = x			simplify 
15 = 15			missing number is 15				“a=a” is the reflexive property

When we start we need to find what x equals, we call this “solving for x”.
We see x = 15. x on the left side and 15 is on the right side of the equation by itself. This is called “x is isolated”. 
When x is isolated on one side and the other side has a single term we call this “x is solved”. 

Basic Structure of a Polynomial

2x			monomial (Greek for one number)
x2 + 2x			binomial, (Greek for two numbers)
x2 + 2x	+ 1		trinomial (Greek for three numbers)
6x3 + 5x2 -1x + 6	This has four monomials so it is a four term polynomial

some terminology
Constant:    5 or another defined immutable quantity.
Variable:     x or another letter or symbol used for unknown values.
Term:          a monomial separated from another by an operation sign.
Coefficient: the constant factor in a monomial. 
The degree of a polynomial: the exponent of the leading term. 


The terms of a polynomial are the individual numbers with or without a variable. A mixed term is a number with a coefficient and a variable, a constant term is a number without a variable. We say degree to specify whether we are dealing with a value, vector,  quadratic, cubic, quaternion, quintion, or higher polynomial. Each of those polynomials have an x variable raised to a power corresponding with the order listed. A value is a number having degree 0, vector is almost a linear equation having 1°, a quadratic is 2°, a cubic 3° and so on.

A monomial is any single term not having a + or – separately it from another term. 2, 3, x, 2x, 3x4 are all monomials. Adding two monomials that are unlike creates a binomial because they can not simplify into a single term. A binomial takes the form of x+n such as x+1. If however they are like then you get a larger monomial. 

2 is a monomial because it has one term. 2+x is a binomial because it has two terms. 2 + x can not be simplified any further so it stands as its own number or value until we can solve for x by substituting a value for it. A binomial is a number of two different sums acting as one since we can not solve for it and get a single value. 

If we take 2+x and do 2+x+x we get 2x+2 since x+x is 2x. If we take 2x+2 and do 2x+2+4 we get 2x+6. Polynomials are the result of sums that could not simplify any further. They are single terms having an unknown variable separated only by ± symbols while being multiplied by the constant number in front of them, which is called their coefficient. Any arithmetic operation can be performed on them but might change their status as a polynomial to something else.

If a polynomial contains a negative power then it really contains a square root and is called a signomial
If a polynomial contains a fractional exponent then it is called a posinomial.
If a polynomial contains a division of some x/some x then it is called a rational expression.
These math statements can be functions but are not considered true but rather pseudo polynomials.

f(x) = √x2 +2x – 3 is not a polynomial: posinomial 
f(x) = x1/2 +2x – 3 is not a polynomial: posinomial 
f(x) = x2 +2x-1 – 3 is not a polynomial: signomial
f(x) = x+1/x – 1   is not a polynomial: rational expression which are standard form linear equations

f(x) = x3+x2–x–1/x2+2x+1 	    is a polynomial  because it divides into a binomial with no fractional remainders. 

f(x) =  x+1/x–1	               has fractional “x term” remainders so it is a rational expression not a polynomial.

We are only interested in polynomials and rational expressions for algebra. A polynomial might have a radical operation on it and still be considered a polynomial if criteria are met.


Multiplying binomials to get a trinomial:

(x + 1) (x -1)					Take two monomials 
(x + 1) (x -1)					first:		 (x) · (x) =    x2
(x + 1) (x -1)					second: 	(x) ·  (-1)= -1x
(x + 1) (x -1)					third:		(1)  · (x) =   1x 
(x + 1) (x -1)					fourth:		(1)  ·  (-1)=  -1
x2 -1x + 1x -1					add the terms together
x2  + 0x -1					the “ x1 ” terms cancel out	
x2 -1						we are left with a binomial.

This process is called “foil”. We will show more sophisticated methods in the multiplying section. This is to show some basic information about foiling and canceling. Later we will not write “0x” but leave it blank. It is offered for illustration so that you know you can fill gaps in a polynomial if you need to but hopefully you won't.						

The square of (x+1) is (x+1)2.  This means we are multiplying “(x+1) · (x+1)”. 
Anytime we square a number we multiply it by itself.
This also means that √(x+1)2 = x+1. 
Because there is no fraction of “x” it is still a polynomial and not a posinomial. 


(x+1)2				a binomial raised to a power of 2
(x+1) · (x+1)			written out in factor notation
x2 +2x +1			The result after multiplying the factors 
				 x2 + 2x + 1 has three terms: x2, 2x, 1 

x2  is a variable because it is a letter with no coefficient.
2x is a mixed variable because it has a constant.
1 is the constant because it is a numeral and not a variable.









The atrocious book Merrill Algebra states a degree as the sum of exponents in a polynomial but this is false as they do nut justify the rational to this approach. They consider x1+x1+x1 to be degree 3 which is false because degree 3 is a cubic x3 or Ax3+Bx2+Cx+D. Many other false assumptions, naivete, and flat out errors exist. Without application of practical use they are as worthless as Tom Hardy and his Mathematicians Apology where they teach math but it has no value to the student and they are not sorry. They are evil Freemasons. ▬   Compare to the excellent work by Bittenger, Ellenbogen, and Johnson, Elementary And Intermediate Algebra second edition where they state, “The leading term of a polynomial is the term of a polynomial of highest degree. Its coefficient is called the leading coefficient and its degree is considered the degree of the polynomial.”  Although Bittenger uses naivete it is done to help the reader instead of mislead like Merril. The Author of Malone Algebra shares the Bittenger definitions although uses better process. 

Full disclosure: It is the conclusion that Malone Algebra is the Bible and most authoritative volume on socially conscious math and that others while tolerated are only acting as agents of fake wokeism. Malone Algebra pushes moral and academic excellence and fears others are operation mocking bird. The author of Malone Algebra works with non-profits and has schools and websites setup to provide quality education to all regardless of race or political affiliation. We are well funded and not in if for fame, attention, or money. We use math to create wealth and are well heeled we do not need to fight over the 1% of wealth that the elite encourages the 99% to fight over. Our research here at the Malone Group™ is group breaking and revolutionary, we encourage the ideals of the free exchange of information even in times of war as diplomacy and alliances are crucial. We praise Wikipedia in having a free medium with exceptional quality, Khan academy for accessibility but question content, delivery, and overall goals. We denounce Ivy leagues, State Universities, and Greek Society as hoarding knowledge only to destroy it in an attempt to create a monopoly on information to form a society that is slave run and push the idea that they are the gate keepers to success when they are little more than indoctrination centers that are horribly flawed and push they wrong bias. It can be proven my group has dirt on them. The exist merely because of the ignorance of the general public which they keep ignorant with lies and deceive. Wolves teaching a mass of sheep. They are evil intentionally so. 


Polynomial Operations 

Polynomials can be calculated using all 6 arithmetic operation + – ∙ / ^√.

Polynomial addition:
You are at lunch and a friend is selling her dessert. You and another friend really want it. 
Before anyone offers a price you say:

(a) “I will match anyone's price plus $1...”  or
(b) “I will double any offer...”	or
(c) “I will double any offer plus $1...” 

Since you do not know what your friend will say you just agreed to pay what amount? Unknown price+$1= x+1.
This is written as “x+1 dollars”. This is used in business and construction.

You are going to pay x+1 (in dollars) what is your friend willing to pay? We could guess and make a table of all possible guesses or just some. Let's guess some.

“Friends offer” we think
Our offer
$0.50
$1.50
$0.75
$1.75
$1
$2
$1.35
$2.35

Whatever we think he might be willing to pay we have to be ready to pay that plus another dollar. Let friends offer be “x” for “unknown” and our offer be “x+1”:

If x = 0.5   	then    0.5+1 = 1.5 
If x = 0.75 	then  0.75+1 = 1.75 
If x = 1      	then       1+1 = 2 
If x = 1.35 	then  1.35+1 = 2.35  

Our original equation was x+1. Replacing x with a constant is called substitution or substituting for x.
If his number is x and our number is 1 adding them is x+1. Because x is a letter and 1 is a constant they can not combine to make one number. To combine we must substitute.

By themselves x and 1 are single terms meaning single numbers so by themselves we call them monomials. “x” is is a monomial and “1” is a monomial. When we add them we have a two term number called a binomial. They cannot be simplified further so (x+1) is our number. We put in () so they are grouped together do not not always have to. We can add number like this but further adding starts causing multiplication to occur.

Polynomial multiplication:
We offered x+1 when a third person shows up and says the y will pay $0.25 more than us. They are offering 
(our price) + 0.25. We substitute “x+1” into the grouping symbols:

(our price) + 0.25 = their offer			take data and form an equation with words
(x+1)+0.25	    = their offer			replace words with variables	
x+(1+0.25)	    = their offer			simplify by adding constants,	       “moving ()” = associative property	
x+1.25		    = their offer			x+1.25 is  simplest form 
		

A fourth person shows up and says the will pay double the highest bidder: 2(last offer) = current offer 

2(last offer)			replace words with what it asks you to; last offer was x+1.25
2(x+1.25)			multiply factor with every term inside ()
(2∙x+2∙1.25)			we are multiply every term with the factor “2”
(2∙x)+(2∙1.25)			using distributive property
2x+2.5				simplified

Recap: 		2(last offer)→		2(x+1.25)→	(2x)+(2.5)→	        2x+2.5 is final answer

2(last offer)		what we heard so wrote it down
2(x+1.25)		substituted words with “the price”
(2x)+(2.5)  		distributed the terms out of () and multiplied
2x+2.5 			normally this is where we add the two term but can't because of the variable
2x+2.5			final answer

This shows how to add and multiply a simple real life word problem by taking data and converting it into an equation with words then substituting those words with numbers and variables to create a formula. A formula is an equation containing variables that explains how to get answer to something. Later we call these formulas functions. We used  association to regroup () during addition and used distribution to regroup during multiplication.

Substitution, association, distribution, and equivalence statements:
This shows us substituting a constant for x
If x = 0.5   then    0.5+1 = 1.5 
If x = 0.75 then  0.75+1 = 1.75 
If x = 1      then      1+1 = 2 
If x = 1.35  then 1.35+1 = 2.35  
This shows us substituting a binomial for price
(our price) + 0.25 = their offer			
(x+1)+0.25	    = their offer	
2(last offer)			
2(x+1.25)

In the future instead of using full words and phrases like “our price” we will probably write p = our price. 
If we have multiple prices we will use subscripts to keep track of them. Subscripts define two different numbers with the using the same variable. This happens with series like functions.

Association
(x+1)+0.25	    = their offer						cant add x +1 first	
x+(1+0.25)	    = their offer						can add 1+0.25 first 

Association mean that changing the grouping of the 90 does not change the result. 
This is similar to commutation but we move the groupings to change adding pattern instead of the numbers:

	(x+1)+0.25	=	(x+1+0.25)	=	x+(1+0.25)  	any grouping because addition is associative
	x+1+0.25 	= 	1+x+0.25 				any order because addition is commutative. 

Association: 1+2+3 = (1+2)+3 = 1+(2+3) = (1+2+3)			this is all possible grouping for this sum
Commutation: 1+2+3 = 1+3+2 = 2+1+3 = 2+3+1 = 3+1+2= 3+2+1	there are “3 choose 2” combinations	
Distribution
2(x+1.25)								can't add first multiply second, so distribute		
(2x)+(2.5)								2∙x is 2x

I skipped some steps because this is mental math, here are the full steps as originally shown plus extra:
2(x+1.25)	can not simplify what is in () so we must use distribution.

x+1.25 can not be added because it is simplified already. Simplified is when all like term are added and any remaining operation that can be done are done. In Pemdas “P” is parentheses so we are supposed to do all operations in () before moving on. There is only one operation to do, add, and we can not do it in this form so we have to move on. Distribution allows us to move on by regrouping the ().

2(x+1.25) becomes (2∙x)+(2∙1.25) which becomes (2x)+(2.5) which becomes 2x +2.5.
2(x+1.25) →	       (2∙x)+(2∙1.25) →		       (2x)+(2.5) →		 2x +2.5.

The arrow “→” means “becomes” and is used like an equals sign. It is used for showing steps.
The double-headed arrow “↔” means congruent or equivalent. It is used for definitions as answers for 'plugging'.
“Plugging” or “plug in” is a lazy slang way of saying substitute. It is said when space or time is short.

The formula for distribution is ≡ a(b+c) = (a+b)+(a+c). Let's try a practice example and then our example:

	a(b+c) = (a∙b)+(a∙c)	↔	    2(3+4) = (2∙3)+(2∙4)  	→      6+8 = 14
	a(b+c) = (a+b)+(a+c)	↔	2(x+1.25) = (2∙x)+(2∙1.25)	→  2x+2.5 = 2x+2.5

Equivalence Statements
We replace (substitute) the variables in a formula with the variables and constants from our equation.
We use the 3 line equal sign “ ≡ ”to mean definition. 
We write formulas after a definition. Definition means the formula or the actual result. 
If an actual result it is only defined with the idea it will be plugged in for another variable. 
We define a number to be used in place of a variable in a complicated equation. 
This is when all the different symbols for equals or becomes. 
It is to keep things tidy. A sea of ===== would look bad and be harder to read. 

Look at how organized my writing is. The symbols line up and there is appropriate white space inbetween unfamiliar symbols so as to not distract the reader. Familiar symbols “+” and “=” are are close but not crammed keeping focus on where it is wanted. Each line has three parts that needed to be separated. 

1. a(b+c) = (a∙b)+(a∙c)	↔  The two equations are equal so we use an = sign. Use space then arrow.
2. 2(3+4) = (2∙3)+(2∙4)  	→  The two equations are equal so we use an = sign. Use space then arrow.	
3.                 6+8 = 14	       The two sums are equal so we use an = sign. 

Two equations that are equal are written with an equals sign. Showing that two pairs of equations are equal because we are comparing an equivalence formula to our substituted version requires the use of something different than an = sign or else you can not tell which part of which equation is attached to what. Instead of = I used ↔ which means direct substitution, both sides of the ↔ are equal in value and structure, they are congruent in size. 

Finally the → means indirect substitution which has same value but different structure because the size is smaller and some terms may be canceled. I could have used all = signs but it would be dumber and uglier. These are not rules but a matter of preference and readability. Less is more, only use when absolutely needed or it will look worse and no one will understand you.




Polynomial subtraction aka adding negatives
Now that we understand variables and binomials lets add and subtract some binomials.

(3x+5) +7 = 3x+12		when adding combine constants...
(3x+5) –7 = 3x –2  		when adding (–) combine constants...

(3x+5) +7x = 10x +5		when adding combine like terms...
(3x+5) –7x = –4x +5		when adding (–)combine like terms...		     (there are 2 choose 2 combinations) 

(3x+5) + (7x+1)  = 10x +6	when adding combine like terms...
(3x+5) + (7x–1)  = 10x +4	when adding (±)combine like terms...

(3x+5) + (–3x+1)  =   0x +6	when adding combine like terms...
(5x+5) + (–3x–1)  = –2x +6	when adding (–)combine like terms...

(3x+5) –   (3x+1)  =   0x +6	when adding combine like terms...
(5x+5) – (–3x–1)  =   8x +6	when adding (–)combine like terms...

(3x+5) –  (–3x+1)  =   6x +6	when adding combine like terms...
(5x+5) – (3x–1)     =   2x +6	when adding (–)combine like terms...			(3 choose 2 or 23 or 3!+2!)

When adding negatives and positives you can re-order terms using the commutative property. 
Here the terms are well ordered and behaved but they are not always this way.

Try to add the x terms first then the constants. If they are not lined up rewrite then so they are.
Identify the sign of the operation and the sign of the number. Grouping binomials this way helps. They are not required but exclude the operator so you do not have to do weird things like sign flip nor distribute.

7x+3–2x+5–1+3x–8		I would not know how to group is polynomial...
7x+3–2x+5–1+3x–8		5–1 = 4, combine it
7x+3–2x+4+3x–8		order the terms “7x+3x–2x = 8x” 
7x+3x–2x+4+3–8		all we did was “swap” 3x and “3”. Now cancel “7x+3x–2x = 8x”
8x+4+3–8			combine remaining					
8x–1				this is the simplest we can make it

(7x+3–2x+5–1+3x–8) = 8x–1		
The entire polynomial is 1 number written as a sum of numbers. The polynomial is a sum like (1+2+3) so we put it in (). Even though (1+2+3) is three terms it is 1 number called “6”. You have to think about polynomials as terms that sum to a single number even if we can not write it that way. We do not know what 8x – 1 equals because we do not know what x equals. All we know is that it is “8 times some number minus 1”. When we know a value we write it in numerical form, when we don't we tend to use words or variables to abbreviate words. Capital letters and different than lowercase; x =x but x ≠X. We tend to have two different values and call them “little x” and “big x”. We tend to use subscripts and say things like: “x1+x2=X ↔ ½+⅕ = 0.7” which in English is;
“x one plus x two equals big x is equivalent to one half plus one fifth equals point seven”.     

We could not regroup the polynomial because it was so jumbled but we could re-order: 
7x+3–2x+5–1+3x–8 = (7x+3x–2x+5+3–1–8) = 8x–1
(7x+3x–2x+5+3–1–8)						now we can regroup or did it mentally...
(7x+3x–2x)+(5+3–1–8)					7+3–2 = 8 and 5+3–1–8 = –1 so 8x–1…    		
(8x)+(5+3–1–8)						in red cancel because they are inverse
8x–1								8x–1 is what survived cancellation

Remember that if the signs match like ++ –– add; if they differ like –+ or –+  subtract. Mostly this is not too important. This is being taught just to be able to do linear and quadratic equations. Mostly graphing parabolas of the form Ax2 +Bx+C. After FOIL we will be working with this formula.

One last thing: You can have different variables than x from a through z. If the letter is different then they are not like terms and can not be combined.

Add 3x and 3y: 3x+2y		                                    we are done. Can't combine because they are unlike terms  
Add – 2x and 5m and 4a:   	4a+4m –2x  	            write the variables in alphabetic or reverse alphabetic order
Add x2+7x+10a+6+3x2 =	4x2+7x+10a+6 		write highest power first then rest of series.

4x2 has highest power so we write it first. Followed by 7x because it has “x”. Then 10a because it has a variable. 
6 comes last because no variable.

We write in alphanumeric order unless degree takes precedence. We write from largest term to least or least to largest. Exponents are always the largest if you substitute using large numbers like a million of infinity. They get really big, like infinity big while constants like 6 are always just their starting value. 

Multiplying polynomials
You can multiply polynomials. Multiply bases with bases and raise their powers using exponent laws, multiply coefficients with coefficient. The coefficient is the number in front of the variable or a constant with no variable.  A number like 6 we leave as 6, but realize it could be rewritten to be 6x0 which = 6. Kinda like a fraction ½ can be written as 3/6 . It looks different but value is the same. Algebra has lots of tricks and sneaky numbers. Things like this are called “notation tricks”. We use them for algebraic manipulation. We will learn lots of notation and ways to write and solve equations.

I have “x” and want to add 1 to it, so I get x+1. This is the simplest binomial I can think of. Lets multiply it.
1(x+1) = x+1			() without an operator implies we should multiply; anything times 1 is itself
2(x+1) = 2x+2			multiply everything inside () just like 2(1+3)= 2+6
3(x+1) = 3x+3			we see a pattern and can do this mentally

Any problem like a(b+c) will equal ab+ac. We call this distributive law. It is very frequent in our problems.
1(x+7) = x+7
2(x+7) = 2x+14
3(x+7) = 3x+21
0(x+7)= 0		anything times 0 = 0 we call this multiplying by zero law.
3(x+0) = 3x		3∙x+3∙0	 the constants cancel but the variables do no

Very easy lets try two binomials starting with (x+1)(x+1). Every blue term has to multiply with every red term. Combinatorics tells us we will have 4 terms or 2 choose 2. Lets see:

(x+1)(x+1)			easy
x(x+1)+1(x+1)			distribute	
x2+x+x+1			multiply
x2+2x+1			simplify 

If you find working with variables hard write out your problem on the far side of paper and work out a similar problem using numbers but avoid 0,1,2 because they cancel or give funny errors due to having special properties. They are not good numbers to check with. 3 and 7 are good unless it makes your value to big to handle.
(x+1)(x+1)			easy		use x =3	(3+1)(3+1)		easy        	         (4)(4) = 16
x(x+1)+1(x+1)			distribute			3(3+1)+1(3+1)		distributive law		
x2+x+x+1			multiply			9+3+3+1		multiply 
x2+2x+1			simplify 			16			simplify
(3+1)(3+1) = (4)(4)= 16 If we distribute correctly we should get 16. For hard formulas to learn (foil is not hard) we can set our equations equal to each other to create an equivalence. Note that The middle two terms always combine for any two binomials of the form (a+b)(a+c).

(x+1)(x+1)      =3+1)(3+1)	    this is what we are doing when we write two equations on opposites of paper
x(x+1)+1(x+1)= 3(3+1)+1(3+1)

x2+x+x+1        = 9+3+3+1	    x+x =2x like 3+3 = 2∙3 repeated adding of the same number is called (∙)  
x2+2x+1          = 16		    input 3 in for x
32+2∙3+1         = 16
9+6+1             = 16                     middle terms are called “bx1 +bx2” always combine. This is key for “quadratics”.
       16            = 16		   this is the reflexive property “a=a”	

New example:(x+2)(x+3)

(x+2)(x+3)			we need to write x+2 as a variable use x+2 = j
(j)(x+3)			substitute j for x+2 (yes you can use a variable for a sum or even entire equation)		
jx+3j				distribute (j)(x+3) into jx+3j
(x+2)(x) + (3)(x+2)		input x+2 back for j
x2+2x+3x+6			
x2+5x+6			this is a quadratic in standard form “Ax2+Bx+C”  because x has power 2

Actually we did not need to use that many (). 

jx+3j = j∙x+3∙j			at this point substitute x+2 back in for j
(x+2)x+3(x+2)			this is all the () we need because it serves same purpose as (∙)
x2+2x+3x+6			we get same

This is the truth:
(x+1)2 = (x+1)(x+1)		once more
(x+1)(x+1)			what is x∙x? x2.  If x does not have a coefficient then the first term is always  x2
x2+2x				what is 1+1? 2. add constants and write the sum as “+bx” where b=sum
x2+2x+1			multiply constants and write as “+c” where c is product of constants


Thoughts: We do this mentally using the last method so trying to explain cumbersome methods is tedious.
There where three good things that came out of this exercise:

1. monic (A=1) polynomials follow Ax2+Bx+C giving us the last method to quickly foil two binomials
2. teaching the use of (x+1) → “j” → equation to simplify distribution of binomials
square x getting x2 then add constants as a coefficient of x1 then add product of constants
3. Double distribution
(x+1)(x+1)			target the second binomial and do not take anything out
x(x+1)+1(x+1)			distribute twice first with x then with the constant

That is three different ways to do foil without teaching foil. FOIL is a mnemonic for children to learn. It kinda helps but is lacking if children are not taught algebra correctly like how to distribute. We need better language.
At the end of the book on page 586 combinatorics tells this math but that is very far ahead so bear with me.
foil is similar to the handshake problem where either you shake my hand or I shake yours is two possibilities but doing one alleviates the need for the other. 
Cookies and cream or cream and cookies is the same combination no doubling combinations allowed.

Alex Brian Chris David need to shake hands once with everyone.	a:bcd	ab ac ad =3 handshakes	Alex shook Brian, Chris, and David's hands.	                Score is 3
No one needs to shake their own hand.			b:cd	bc bd = 2 handshakes		Next round Brian shakes Chris and David's hands.       Score is 3+2
Once hands are shook we do not need it to happen again.	c:d	cd=  1 handshake           	Last round Chris Shakes David's hand. 	                Score is 3+2+1 
If ab then we do not need ba because that already happened. 	 
There is n – 1 handshakes every round. Each round 1 is subtracted from what the next person must do.         Which is n – 1 each round, each round there are n – 1 handshakes to do.	
Distributive property: For any numbers a, b, c:

a (b + c) = ab + ac   and    (b + c) a = ba + ca 
a (b – c) = ab – bc   and    (b – c) a = ba – ca 

The law is given for three variables so that is the bias that most people retain well onto their adult life.
Foil is simply applying the law twice. People are capable of more if they are not limited with bias.
Single distribution becomes a crutch and dependency. Maybe we can ween people of bad habits. 

Single distribution in and factoring out:

1. 2(x+3) 				we need to distribute the 2 into (x+3) using multiplication
2. (2x+2∙3)			we need to multiply every term in () by 2
3. (2x+6)				we can leave binomial inside () or factor it out
4. 1(2x+6)			to factor out multiply every term by 1 and write outside
5. 2x+6				factoring out removes () by using multiplication
2x+6				sum is unchanged because we multiplied by 1

Here is the problem; Most books show distribution in a naive way that is more like factoring out than distributing in:

1. 2(x+3) 				multiply 2 and x and write product inside ()
2. (2x)				add + sign to the right of ()
3. (2x)+				multiply 2 and 3 and write in new () to right of + sign
4. (2x)+(6)			remove ()'s by multiply each one by 1
5. 1(2x)+1(6)			factor out the 2x and the 6
6. 2x+6				we are done

This feels more like factoring than distributing but takes same number of steps if we combine steps 2 and 3 however it is less clean or clear. It is a little hacky and fuzzy logically. I do not think professionals teachers like this method as it seems to give a bad intuition. The temptation to simply erase () without having a solid understanding of why or how to cancel them is a problem. Even if it yields the correct result the logic used to derive the answer is wrong. In math we follow rules and train to learn them so we can comprehend them and explain our every action. The rules are what validates our choices. If someone or even ourselves questions a step or operation we can state why we are allowed to perform said action. Without rules how do we know we are making legal operations? It is a problem...math cares about process and methods not simply results.

Distribution seems to be the opposite of factoring. Distro goes in factoring goes out.
For 2(x+3) I am multiplying a binomial by 2 not factoring it out and multiplying the factorized components with the outside factor 2. Second method is dirty factoring pretending to be distribution. Feels dirty and oh so wrong.

Every operation has a reciprocal operation. We have a bias for positive operations over negative operation.
We learn the positive operation first then the negative to check our work. We call the negative operation the inverse although both are inverses of each other.

Operation  
Inverse
Add
Subtract 
Multiply 
Divide
Power 
Root 
Distribute method 1:     (multiplication)
Distribute method 2:     (1/division) = cross-multiplying
Factor:      (division)
Distro-1:    (1/multiplication) = 1/cross-multiplying

We will use the first method that puts emphasis on multiplication rather than on cross multiplying. 
The are many schemes for distribution. 

Method 1:using known constants
We can distribute the first part of the binomial using method 1 then repeat process for second part.

(x+3)(x+4)	→	(x2 +4x)	→ (3x+12)	→ (x2+7x+12) 

We distribute this mentally as we type on a keyboard. Math is using when you use sound logic.
We treat distribution as a scaling operation. The first binomial is our scale factor.
We wrote the two parts as two phases but can combine them in a compound operation. 
We can combine many steps of various operations as we choose.
Scale factor is written as s in script. These slower methods are shown for clarity not speed so that logic is understood.

s(x+n) = (sx+sn) if s is a binomial we use s as a variable and then produce a final sum of products after we have the form (sx+sn). (sx+sn) →(Ax2+bx+c)

This is probably how a computer using code would do FOIL:
(x+n)(x+m)→ let s = (x+n)→ s(x+n)→ (sx+sn)→(Ax2+bx+c)

But we are not computer and can do it in less steps. 
What we lack in speed we make up for in efficiency and elegance.

(x+n)(x+m)→(x2+xn+xm+nm)→(Ax2+bx+c)		where bx = xn+xm, c = nm

For foil and and type of factoring operation we use the variables n and m to stand for the factors. N = number and m is the letter before out of convention of using neighboring variables.

F= x2 this is a given if monic. If cof exist multiply them mentally and toss in front of x2.
O= xn write x and then one of the constants in front of it. It doesn't even have to be the corresponding one.
I= xm ditto from last step. Just make sure you do not use the same factor twice.
L= nm  write product of constants.

To be continued...


FOIL STANDS FOR FIRST, OUTSIDE, INSIDE, LAST
(x -1) ( x -1)		   	 Multiply these to get x2. This is the first term.
(x -1) ( x -1)		  	Multiply these to get -1x. This is the second term.	
(x -1) ( x -1)		  	Multiply these to get -1x. This is the third term.	
(x -1) ( x -1)		 	Multiply these to get 2. This is the fourth term.	

first outside inside last
x2   -1x      -1x    +1	  	Add a + sign for the positive constant and line them in order.
       -2x			Combine like terms. Like terms have the same base and the same degree.
x2    -2x + 1		    	This is called standard form for a quadratic notation.
(x -1) ( x -1)		  	Practice on easy ones using paper till you can do this mentally.
x2   -2x + 1		   	x2 makes an umbrella shape on line charts called a parabola or parabolic.

Let's try the foil with something different then learn distribution correctly. Foil:(3x –2)(x+5)

(3x –2)(x+5)			our equation
3x2 +15x –2x – 10		done mentally
3x2 +13x – 10			middle terms combined and we are done


Ax2: (3x –  )(x+  )   = 3x2			first      terms of both binomials is called  “F”
Bx1 : (3x –  )(   +5)  = 15x			outside terms of both binomials is called “O”
Bx2 : (     –2)(x+   )  =  –2x			inside   terms of both binomials is called  “I”
C    : (     –2)(    +5) = –10x			last       terms of both binomials is called  “L”

The most important facts:

The coefficients, “cof”, are A,B,C and will be given as constants when working actual problems.
Ax2 is the leading term because it has the biggest exponent. 
A is the leading coefficient because it is the cof of the the leading term.  
Bx1 and Bx2 are middle terms that always combine by adding their cof to make a single Bx term. 
The Bx term is important for “completing the square and quadratic formula”.
C is the last term and is always a constant. C = constant is easy to remember.

Ax2+Bx+C is usually written in all lowercase letters as ax2+bx+c. “A” may or may not be “1”. If it is “1” then we call the polynomial a monic polynomial. Monic means “1”. This is not terribly important but exists because we use monics as a lazy way of avoiding hard factoring by grouping and other messy operations. In short monics are the easiest to work with. Familiarize the terms with there number position and letters from FOIL.

ax2 is first term      is made with     “First”
bx1 is second term is made with     “Outside”
bx2 is third term    is made with     “Inside”
c is fourth term     is  made with    “Last”

For  ax2+bx+c we see there are three terms and 1st , 2nd , 3rd correspond to ax2, bx, c. 
We can write any polynomial in ascending or descending order of rank of exponents. 
ax2+bx+c is written in descending order but can be written c+bx+ax2 to make it ascending.  

Method 1 continued

(x+7)(x+3)		Multiply blue with blue and red with red. Multiply mn = c.
x2+7x+3x+21		note that we purposely wrote (x+7) = 7x and that (x+3) = 3x

x2+10x+21		7x+3x =10x

The foil way:
(x+7)(x+3)		
x2+3x+7x+21
x2+10x+21		we get same. FOIL is clumsy. Note that addition is commutative: 3+7 = 7+3.

For any multiplication of two binomials

1. immediately write x2 and then add a cof to make +/– A if applicable.
2. write a +/–  sign and then write the sum of nx+mx
3.  write a +/– sign and the product nm
Any three step method will be shortest because each term needs at least one step involving operations to calculate.

1. Whats is Ax2 ? Let me calculate ... A1∙A2 ∙x2
2. Whats is bx ? Let me calculate ... bx1+bx2
3. Whats is c ? Let me calculate ... c1∙c2

This proves three step methods are superior to standard FOIL. FOIL uses 5 steps. There are other conventions, notions, formulas, and algorithms in math that are tedious, cumbersome, slow, or just plain wrong. The most important thing is to learn and be able to apply and comprehend the why of a law.  When you are good and can follow the laws you can see which ones are wrong and break them. Learning mnemonics means you are learning someone else's slow algorithm and it is a form of sabotage. You will be dependent on others work for life and suffer. That is not what I want. Most teachers are satanists and Freemasons. They take simple multiplication of binomials and turn it into a shit show.

With faster logic we can take product mentally in on go and write horizontally:
(x+3)(x+4) = x2+7x+12 

The usual teaching is done using geometric proofs. I have a square of unknown sides:
base = x, height = x.  the area is x2. I add or subtract different amounts to each side creating a quadratic polynomial = a rectangle.

Area =bh		formula for rectangular area
Area=xx		formula for square area
Area = (x±n)(x±m)	formula for rectangular area... note how we needed () to keep things from getting lost
Area = Ax2+Bx+c	A quadratic is a rectangular area comprised of four rectangles, One a perfect square.

Greeks used this to build alters for there gods. If it was off the god killed them.
This can be used to scale an indoor pool from 15'x30' to 10'x40'. People take designs from others and scale them to fit their space. This is an application. Use math to solve problems not cause them.


				■


						Special square formulas

Here is a list of important “square” formulas: These are used to make factoring easier.

1. (x+y)2 		= x2+2xy+y2			perfect square trinomial	ax2+bx+c
2. (x – y)2		= x2 – 2xy +y2			perfect square trinomial	ax2 –bx+c 
3. (x+y)(x–y) 	= x2 – y2 			difference of two squares	x2 –c where c is a square 
4. (x+y)3              	 = x3+3x2y+3xy2+y3		perfect cube quadnomial        ax3+bx+cx+d
5. (x – y)3 	= x3 – 3x2y + 3xy2 – y3		perfect cube quadnomial	ax3+bx+cx+d

Below are “graphs” of the the five “functions”. For all graphs x = 2. This is for illustration not instruction.

This is the first and second polynomial functions.
The only difference is position, one is moved to the left and the other to the right. They both share the same y intercept.
The middle term “bx” causes horizontal shift.

The shape is called a “parabola”. It is a quadratic.
Is is associated with area.


This is a difference of two squares. It always has a y intercept on the y axis. 
This is another parabola. All quadratics have Ax2 as there biggest term.








This is the last two graphs. They have Ax3 as there biggest term.
These are not parabolas these are called cubics. They are associated with 
volume.




Polynomials are sums that contain more than one term. Polynomials come up in area and volume problems. Area and volume are geometry problems but are written using algebra. We study algebra so we can solve problems from geometry, trigonometry and calculus.	There is also statistics but that can be broken up between algebra and calculus.


Math is used to solve real world problems. If you do not like using math to solve problems you are free to use other methods but it will take longer to solve and your solutions will be weaker. Using math makes solutions stronger and quicker to attain leaving more time for better activities. Its a freedom and power thing. 


Before we can graph we need to be able to factor. The graphs are offered for early exposure of what to aim for. 
Factoring	

Factoring a polynomial is the process of finding the factors that produce it. It is the inverse of distribution.
(x+3)(x+7) = x2+10x+21 therefore (x+3) and (x+7) are the factors of x2+10x+21. 


(     )(      ) = x2+9x+14			we need to find the missing factors for x2+9x+14
		       14			what are the factors of 14 that add to 9? 14 only has (2,7) as factors so...		
(x+2)(x+7) = x2+9x+14			we put the factors of 14 in as shown. Does “2∙7=14”? yes so...

Check our work by foiling our factors: (x+2)(x+7)      =	x2+2x+7x+21	   = 	x2+9x+21	 
If we have the right factoring FOILING should give the original polynomial. 
If we get a different polynomial we used the wrong factors and have to start over.

Let's examine quadratics. From the list we had “(x+y)2 = x2+2xy+y2	   perfect square trinomial”. A perfect square has two matching factors and trinomial means three terms. This is a perfect square that has three terms. Not to confuse but in algebra they call squares “perfect squares” and rectangles “imperfect squares” because one side is shorter.

(x+y)2 = x2+2xy+y2			(x+y)2 =(x+y)(x+y) because we have to square by multiplying by itself

(x+2)2 					something in () is being squared. We need to multiply it by itself 		
(x+2)(x+2)				x+2 is being multiplied by x+2
x2+2x+2x+4				we have four terms
x2+4x+4				the middle two always combine leaving three terms

			
This is the formula for			If we add 2 to each side we 
 the area of a square.			make a bigger square area.
We have x∙x = x2.




If we have a square with unknown sides we write the formula as “x times x” or “ x2 ” for area.  If we add two units to each side we get a side length of x+2 with area of (x+2)2. This helps explain the exponent rules. 
(x+2)2 = (x+2)(x+2)  not (x2+22). Do not make this beginners mistake.

(   )(   ) = x2+10x+16		    we need to find the factors
(x+  )(x+  )			    for a monic quadratic the first terms are always both x
(x+m)(x+n)			    the second terms are the factors “m” and “n” from rectangle area (two pages ago)
				    what are the factors of 16 that add to make 10?
(x+2)(x+8)			    factors of 16: (2∙8) or (4∙4)...   2+8=10 or 4+4=8.  factors are 2 and 8. 
x2+2x+8x+16			   check by FOILING
x2 +10x+16			   it checks

ax2 is first term      is made with     “First”		we did not have an “a” so just x2 because it is monic
bx1 is second term is made with     “Outside”		bx1 = m		
bx2 is third term    is made with     “Inside”		bx2 = n
c is fourth term     is  made with    “Last”		

The last page was dense. It contained a lot of information. I wanted to give an intuition for how quadratics where invented and used. They represent an area either in a literal or figurative sense. Something to do with squares and there area whether an actual geometric shape like a box or a numerical sense like simply squaring a number to get a product.

I want to work with quadratics for a bit. The goal is to teach that FOIL or any version of it has four terms and the middle two always combine. FOIL is an algorithm for solving two binomial multiplication. An algorithm means the method you used, also called process, also called “logic”... it means what operations/steps/order you used.

So now you know what: an algorithm is, a method,  a process is, logic is:

1. Algorithm: the steps used to solve a problem
2. Method: specific technique applied to obtain a result
3. Process: focused on order and number of steps

In the end they are interchangeable words. A faster algorithm is just less steps. We could solve a math or any other problem is 3 steps, or 5, or 10. We could add steps for better communication or we could remove steps for better speed. This is what is meant by “a faster algorithm”. They gain speed by removing steps. We want to quickly obtain accurate answers. The way to do this is by using better algorithms. This is the definition of efficiency and as math students we want to be efficient. In work and life we want to quickly complete one task and move on to the other. Math is not fun nor intended to be. It is a slow and tedious chore. However if we finish quickly we gain more time and money to do more important things like play or work on projects we really care about. There are better ways to say this...

In life you want to make your job easier not harder. In training you want to make training harder not easier. If you train harder than what the actual job is the job will be easy. This is how champions are made. If you are a boxer you train for 5 or 6 rounds knowing you only have to fight 3. 

I want to go to work, put in 100% effort, finish early, leave early, and have more free time to play with my kids or hang out at the club. I want to work really hard so I earn more money than other people so I have more money and free time than them. Part of being an adult is being responsible and accountable for yourself. The world will not care if you are lazy, drop out of school, get poor grades or become poor, have a bad bad or whatever. You have to be responsible for yourself. It is not your parents job, your friends, your enemies, your teachers, your boss, or even your government. Only you are responsible for you. If you do not work hard and make good choices you will suffer and it is nobodies fault but yours. Avoid bad people who do not care about themselves of their future. Friends and family can and will be detrimental. Your job as a student is not to hang out with your friends and socialize. Your job is to make sure that when you grow up you make it big. 

A big part of quadratics is realizing the pattern of distributing twice. The “law” for distribution gives a bad understanding for how to apply it more than once. To factor we have to undo the distribution. Distribution is multiplication so factoring is division. 

We use x as a variable for anything, x and y for functions, abc for the coefficients of polynomials, n to stand as just a number, n and m as factors of some sort of algorithm. For quadratics understand n and m is important because they are the factors that produce the constant term “C”. To factor we need to start with “C”...













Factor a trinomial by writing its factors as two binomials. 
Factor a non-monic quadratic by writing the whole thing inside () then factor out the leading cof by dividing every term by it and then writing it as a factor outside the ().
There are 8 combinations of signs. The leading cof can be any number making it non-monic:
	
1. x2+bx+c 	x2+13x+36		 all operators positive then m,n are both positive. Easy
(x+4)(x+9)
			
2. x2 –bx+c	x2 –2x+15		middle term negative then m,n both negative. Easy
			(x –5 )(x+3)
	
3. x2+bx –c	x2+x –12		c is negative then n is negative and |n| < m. Less easy 
			(x – 3)(x+4)

4. x2 –bx –c	x2 –3x –10		–b, –c then n is negative and |n|>m. Less easy  
			(x –5)(x+2)	
					
5. –x2+bx+c	–x2+4x+5		–a then factor out – 1 and all signs flip. Less Easy	
			–(x2 –4x–5)
			–(x –5)(x+1)	

6. –x2–bx+c	–3x2–6x+72		–a then factor out – 1 and all signs flip. Less Easy	
			– 3(x2+2x – 24)
			 –3(x –4)(x+6)    					

7. –x2+bx–c	 –4x2+12x–16		–a then factor out – 1 and all signs flip. Less Easy
			 –4(x2+3x–4)  
			 –4(x –1)(x+4

8. –x2–bx–c	–5x2 –15x–10		–a then factor out – 1 and all signs flip. Less Easy
–5(x2+3x+2)
			–5(x+1)(x+2)

x2+6x+9					 x2+2xy+y2			(x+m)(x+m) 
(x+3)(x+3)				            This is a perfect square since both factors are the same3∙3=9 3+3 = 6

√x2+6x+9 = (x+3)				when factors match you are actually taking the square root


x2 –12x+27					this one has a negative bx term (x2–bx+c)			
(x–3)(x–9)					we find factors of 27 that “add” to – 12

If bx is negative and c is positive both factors are positive. Two negatives cancel when you multiply: –3 ∙ –9 = 27.
Why do negatives cancel in multiplication? What would it mean to have a negative group?

  2∙3 	= 3+3             = 6		two groups of 3
  2∙–3 	= –3–3           = –6		two groups of –3
–2∙–3 	= –(–3) –(–3) = 6		negative two groups of – 3, 




If a positive group is something added a negative group is something subtracted.
I added two groups into my basket	I took away two groups from my basket  I took away from the other basket 											      so it goes into my basket



Any concept of negative numbers involves debt. You change directions on a number line. The absolute value is unchanged the only determination is whether sign is positive or negative. Changing direction is called sign negation. Essentially it is a game of “takeaway”.

“3 minus 3” does not equal or mean the same thing as “3 minus negative 3”. As you can see 3–3 ≠ 3–(–3).
I blame poor language and instruction.

1. You can    add     a  positive: (3+) + (3+) =  3 ++ 3 = 6  	normal 3+3 
2. You can subtract a  positive: (3+) – (3+) =  3 –+ 3 = 0 	normal 3–3 	
3. You can   add      a negative: (3+) + (3-) =  3 +– 3 = 0	            weird   3+(–3)		“adding a negative”  
4. You can subtract a negative: (3+) – (3-) =  3 –– 3 = 6 	            weird   3–(–3)		“subtracting a negative”  

This proved to the “ancients” the existence of negative numbers. This very much alarmed them. Numbers in of themselves have a value other than numerical we call “sign quality”. We write a (+) or (–) in superscript to the right of the number so it does not cause confusion with the sign of the operator. This is well known to science for hundreds of years. In modern science velocity of  particle, its position, charge, or its “spin” is given by value signs. An “upspin” is (+) and a “downspin” is (–). You can have positive or negative charge and add or subtract them and there is a numerical quantity attached.

Early cult mathematicians thought this +/– was hidden and therefore “evil”. They were shook. When you subtract the number is positive but the minus sign negates it causing subtraction to occur. Anytime you have ever subtracted both numbers were positive. You were removing a positive quantity as opposed to a negative quantity. N – m both are positive, N – (–m) “–m” is negative but you are removing a negative which is a positive move to the right on a number line. We call this latter move “two negatives cancel” but in reality if signs match add if they are opposite subtract.    

We notice the operator and the number to the right of it to determine which direction a number is traveling. Whether the first number is +/– is irrelevant because we do not care if we start at a negative of positive sum we only care if we are moving left or right from it. We have an operator and then a number that follows it. Both the operator and the number doing the operation have a quality sign. Quality is whether a number is (+) or (–). The compound operator “±” (plus or minus) is said to be different from the quality notation “+/–” (positive/negative) and while true is very strict. I personally do not see myself or anyone I know having a problem with using ± for quality and operation. 

Write () around numbers to determine quality
1. 4+4 becomes (4)+(4)
2. 4 –4 becomes (4) – (4)
3. 4+ –4 becomes (4) +(–4) which is 4–4 which is 4 –4+ which is a (-)(+) so we subtract 
4. 4 –+4 becomes (4) –(4)
5. 4 ––4 becomes (4)+(4)      
x±3 gives two equations: x–3 ; x+3 while (+/–)x is stating that x can be positive or negative with no operation taking place. For particle science I get it but for pure math it is too far removed for practical use. The community wants to discourage the use of ± when referring to quality and leave it to operations only. They do not like when it is used to state “x can be negative or positive”  but rather wish “x plus or minus” when giving the zeros of a quadratic. I see no difference and think that is a silly fight over syntax. Needing two qualities to move left or right on the number line is a matter of mechanics. Math could not operate without these mechanics. These mechanics have been known for hundreds of years. This argument of syntax makes me think a) they do not know what the hell they are talking about, b) scientists have poor background in math and language, or c) they were desperate to invent do to vanity or publish or perish so they invented cockamammie naming conventions. Personally it looks better and is a space saver to use ± for both operation and singular quality but some insist it is an abuse of “math and language”. Pure math only cares about mechanics and does not need permission from code snobs who seek to be the gatekeepers of mathematical expression. People are free to communicate how they wish.





Difference of squares, cubics, and other formulas

A difference of squares has the additive inverses for the constants in the binomial factors of a trinomial. 
(x+n)(x–n) = x2 –nx+nx+n2 = x2 – n2. We can see the middle terms cancel; “ –nx+nx = 0x”.
These formulas will not really help with factoring but are suggested. Ignore until precalc or completing graphing.
All product and factoring formulas are usually written with (a,b) instead of (x,n) or (x,y) so they usually look like:

(a+b)2 = (a+b)(a+b)  = a2+2ab+b2		This is the standard formula for a quadratic: ax2+bx+c
(a–b)2 = (a–b)(a–b)  = a2 –2ab+b2		This is the standard form for quadratic:         ax2–bx+c  
a2–b2  = (a+b)(a –b) = a2 – b2			This is a “difference of two squares” 
a2+b2  = prime         = simplest form		This is a sum of two squares

Multiplying by a third factor creates “cubics” which deal with volume instead of area. Cubics are a quadratic from above multiplied by another binomial: (x+3)(x+3)(x+2) = (x2+6x+9)(x+2) = Ax3+Bx2+Cx+D

a3+b3	= (a+b)(a2–ab+b2)			This is a “sum of two cubes”
a3 –b3   = (a–b)(a2+ab+b2)			This is a difference of two cubes
(a+b)3     = (a+b)(a2+2ab+b2)			This is standard form of a cubic: Ax3+Bx2+Cx+D
(a+b)3 =a3+2a2b+ab2+ba2+2ab2+b3		note: b is a constant so highlighted terms combine
(a–b)3   = (a–b)(a2–2ab+b2)			This is standard form of a cubic: Ax3–Bx2+Cx+D	

We have standard formula we use for graphing because they are well defined: They only contain 1 variable, “x”. This makes them “standard form” short for “standard formula”. When we have odd formulas, also called functions, we have other variables which makes solving harder. In general to solve a polynomial expression you need to have only one undefined variable. This comes up in graphing linear equations where we can have two or more undefined variables. 

Factoring we have done so far: factoring a product during arithmetic like the prime factors of 42 are 2,3,7; factoring and factoring quadratics. We factor quadratics to prepare for graphing them so we can then move on to pre-calculus. We skipped factoring a binomial because it is trivial but will do so now as part of a quick review.

 prime number is a number that is only divisible by itself and 1.
A composite number, called a product, is the result of multiplying two or more factors.
A factor is a number that divides a product and yields an whole number called an integer.
An integer solution is a solution that is not a fraction but a whole number. Factors can only be integers.
While the statement 2.5∙2.5 = 6.25 is true 2.5 is not a factor of 6.25 because it is fractional. Integers only.
The prime factorization of a number is the smallest factors that produce a product.
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that every number has a unique prime factorization.
When factoring pull out the greatest common factors (gcf) of a polynomial (then reduce to lcm).

3x+15			factor a binomial	
3(x+5)			3 is the gcf of 3x and 15

x2y+2x			 factor a binomial
x(xy+2)

(4a3y+16af)		 factor a binomial
4a(a2y+4f)

3x5y2+9x4y2+6x3y2	factor a trinomial	
3x3y2(x2+3x+2)		3x3y2 is the gcf, note this gave us a quadratic we can further factor into (x+1)(x+2)		
			The prime factorization for: 3x5y2+9x4y2+6x3y2 =(x+1)(x+2)(3x3y2)

If a polynomial only has variables that are all the same letter then that polynomial is set to be “written in terms of (variable name)”. Standard formulas are all written in terms of x making them easy to solve. If a polynomial is not written all in terms of one variable but instead many you can try to manipulate it into having one letter and then it will be easier to solve. Taking multi-variable equations and rewriting them all in term of x, or some other letter, is a strong skill and impressive. Here are mixed forms that will be useful to know how to factor later:

(x2 –x)			looks prime...
x(x – 1)		but wasn't. This is sneaky because things were hiding inside what looked already factored.

x4 – 1			          looks prime...
(x2 –1)(x2 +1)		          looks fully factored...
(x–1)(x+1)(x–1)(x+1)	          make sure you pull as many factors out as possible to get the least common multiple.

x2+7x+10		standard quadratic form 
(x+2)(x+5)		standard binomial factored form

(x+2)(x+5)		we multiply of factors to check work. If factors produce original poly then we did it right 
x2+5x+2x+10		This is FOIL
x2+7x+10 		we got original poly so it checks

Application: We have a garden and scale it to build a pool. We take existing square garden “with area x2” and add 2 units to one side and 7 units to another side. This is a formula because I do not know how big everyone's garden is and so I do weird scaling using this formula by plugging in their measurements and finding new area for pool. This is the point of formulas, to have a equation that can be customized for each customers space. You want to know math before you get the job rather than learn as you go because it's harder when you are unprepared. I do not know actual application this is used for but know the possibilities are endless. I do not know what you are going to use it for because I do not know how you live. Show me your lifestyle and I will show you what formula to use to make your job easier. I do not understand Tom Hardy. He should be ashamed of himself.
When you take Calculus the application are very clear, those formulas help you more. Calculus is written in the language of Algebra. Between Algebra and Calculus is some geometry for proofs and trig for functions. We want to get from algebra to calculus and start solving those problems because they solve everything in the real world like physics does but on steroids.

Note that our quadratic was area for a garden. If we take Area/side1 = side2. 
All we did by factoring was divide the area by one side to get the other:  x2+7x+10/(x+2) = x+5		

	     x+5		
(x+2)|x2+7x+10 
         x2+2x
              5x+10
              5x+10		when we do not have anything left to bring down we are down. 

The point of factoring is to build confidence to begin to do division with with polynomials. I do not really feel like giving weird examples of complicated factoring using polynomials I do not understand. I can teach how to factor them but division rules all and factoring is not very challenging. Polynomials that are ugly are just for practice not really application. There will be too many undefined variables and that is problematic. I will put all practice at end of book but really want to get to better math as quick as possible instead of wasting time on fluff.

There are two more important types of factoring to cover and then we move on to division and radicals. That will end polynomials and we will begin graphing polynomials using functions. 	



Factoring by grouping
Sometimes FOIL fails because we can not get integer solutions for a trinomial. What are the factors of 42? 42/7 = 6 so 6 and 7. What are the factors of 6 and 7? the factors of 6 are 2 and 3 which are prime and 7 is also prime. We have 2,3,7 for the prime factorization of 42. Every numeral has a unique string of prime factors that produces it and only it. This is the beauty of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic. Polynomials have a prime factorization too as we shall see in division. 

What is the factors of 7? we already said it is prime. But 3.5∙2=7 how come those are not factors? Because those are fractions and “‡ any number can be multiplied by endless combinations of fraction pairs because fractions create endless ratios ‡”. 

‡Proof: 	
1. Pick a number and call it “product”
2. Divide it by a number called “divisor”
3. Call the result “quotient” and multiply by divisor to get original “product”
4. Now take quotient and divide by 2 to get new quotient and multiply by 2(divisor) to get original number
5. x = x/2∙2 = x/4 ∙4 = x/0.125∙8 = x/10∙10... these are not factors this is merely demonstrating reciprocity
6. You can create ∞ ratios and make them reciprocal with x/y ∙y ▬ Remember a ratio is slope: y/x = x:y

We need integer solutions for polynomial or any other type of factoring or we get endless ratios for any number. In the case of a polynomial a non integer solution means division induced remainders which by definition are rational expressions not polynomial. This is why set theory was introduced in the beginning and I said we are mostly working with ℤ integers. I do not put everything in books only what is relevant. If it is important and other books lack it I add it, if other books have it and it is useless I toss it. Lean and mean and clean code. All math is code so we need to learn the language not cobble answers out. It is simple operations but obscured with funny notations and symbols. This book makes the language clear and shows why it matters and what we are training for. 

x2 +x–6	     there are no factors of 6 that add to 1 so we need to use a method called”factoring by grouping” 
x2 –2x+3x–6	     using ax2+bx+c, multiply ac then find factors of ac that add to b	 ac= 1∙–6, –2+3 =b = 1    
(x2 –2x)+(3x–6)    group using ()()	
x(x–2)+3(x–2)	     factor gcf out of both binom and make sure both pairs of () match 	
(x+3)(x–2)	     keep one pair of () as the first factor and then stuff outside terms into a new () for the factor

(x+3)(x–2)	     we are done. If you want to check foil back.	
x2+3x –2x – 6       foil
x2+x –6	      it checks  
 	
When you factor 3x2+11x+6, you want to find whose product is 18 and whose sum is 11:

3x2+11x+6		if a =3, c=6 then ac = 18  ; if  n=2, m=9 then 2+9 = 11
3x2+2x+9x+6		3 and 2 don't mix but 9 and 6 do. Order wrong so rearrange until you can factor both pairs
(3x2+9x)+(2x+6)          group into two factor-able pairs 
3x(x+3)+2(x+3)	use “+” to separate () then factor making sure both binomials match
(3x+2)(x+3)		this was clean so we don't need to check but...
(3x+2)(x+3)		check anyways for practice
3x2+9x+2x+6		9x+2x = 11x we are good, move on

2x2 + x – 21x		2∙ –21 = –42 –6∙7 = 42	1x is positive so the bigger factor 7 must be positive  
2x2–6x+7x–21x
(2x2–6x)+(7x–21x)	2x(x–3)+7(x–3)	(2x+7)(x–3)

15x2 – 13xy + 2y2		this has two undefined variables just as a challenge. Y is normally a constant =c
15x2 –3xy –10xy +2y2		ac = 30 ac= –3∙–10 both have to be negative to sum to – 13  
3x(5x–y)–2y(5x–y)		pulling out as much stuff as I can...
(3x–2y)(5x–y)   		checked it mentally... looks good

x2+5xy+6y
(x+2)(x+3) (x+2y)(x+3) 			

2a2x+3a2y–14ax–21ay+24x+36y		        mad scientist equation...looks nuts*this is solvable but worthless
(2a2x + 3a2y) “+”  (–14ax –21ay) + (24x +36y)        group like terms (a2 with a2),(a with a),(leftovers with leftovers)
						        group negative signs inside and then separate 90 with “+” 	
a2(2x + 3y) –7a(2x +3y) + 12(2x +3y)  	    pull out gcf. “+–7a” turns int “ –7a”. all three () match so move on   
(a2 –7a+12)(2x + 3y)(2x +3y)(2x +3y)		    collect outside loose terms into one ()
(a–3)(a–4)(2x + 3y)3	    	                factor quadratic into two binom and then group duplicates with exponent   

	 x3 + x2 – x – 1			last one
	(x3 + x2 ) + ( – x – 1)		this is important: I grouped with – inside as always, put + sign outside ()
	x2(x + 1) – 1 (x + 1)		factoring out a –1 makes –x–1 turn into x+1 	
	(x2 – 1)(x + 1)	
	(x + 1)(x – 1)(x + 1)		this is what we want. Prime fully factored form. Smallest pieces.

 x3 + x2 – x – 1 if I do this  (x3 + x2) – (x – 1) I make x positive but keep –1 negative. This is an illegal operation.

4–7–1→(4)–  (7–1)→ (4) –  (6) =2		        changed –7 to 7 but left – 1 negative, result is 2    
4–7–1→(4)+(–7–1)→ (4) +(–8) = 4 –8  = – 4        left both – 7 and –1 the same, inserted + sign resulting in – 4
					       	         2 ≠ –4 answer should be – 4 not 2							 
 

Whatever you do you have to keep parity. It is easier for me to put () around binomials keeping – sign inside and then adding a + sign so that all terms are being added. Then if the negative sign conflicts erase the + sign while keeping whatever was in the () balanced. Putting the – outside means you multiplied by – 1 to one of the components but not both causing a parity error. This unbalances the signs and causes wrong answers.

(x ± y)2		= x2 ± 2xy +y2			perfect square trinomial
(x+y)(x–y) 	= x2 – y2 			difference of two squares
(x+y)3              	 = x3+3x2y+3xy2+y3		perfect cube quadnomial
(x – y)3 	= x3 – 3x2y + 3xy2 – y3		perfect cube quadnomial

That was tough. There are endless forms. I wanted a quick run through to get to graphing and functions.	 There is such a thing a extraneous training. If it isn't one of the main versions then we try to solver a variable and turn it into one but that is informal real life problems where someone has deviated horribly off the path and created their own proprietary formulas. There is no real reason to do this except sabotage. Read short story:
After WW11 Russia was very antisemitic and abused newly freed Jews. They created the P.O.S. Or Pale of Settlement near Poland (which was first country Hitler invaded and occupied as it shares border with Russia and Germany. Jewish Professionals who lived in Russia's capital (when Russia was still the U.S.S.R. Or CCCP) Moscow were discriminated against. When they tried to get jobs as math teachers at the University they were given unfair tests with trick questions called “Jew Killers”. The questions were overly complicated but contained relativity simple solutions so that if they complained it would be demonstrated how easy to solve it was when in reality it wasn't. The goal was to prevent them from gaining jobs at a prestigious University, a way of saying,” we do not want you here”. I do not use bogus tricks or nonsense as it doesn't help or prepare students for anything meaningful. This is enough factoring. We will do more during rational expressions and when we learn division.    

Graphing and functions
Graphing is done using coordinates similar to longitude and latitude. We use a rectangular grid with lines equally spaced. We use two number lines. The First one is called the x-axis and is identical to the number lines we have been using so far. The second one is vertical and called the y-axis. 










The grid has 4 quadrants, or regions numbered 1-4 starting in the upper right and rotating counterclockwise. 
Locations are given as a combination of an x value and a y value using this notation (x,y). An x value represents a horizontal position and a y value a vertical position. The center of the grid has a vertex where the two axes cross. This point is called the origin and its coordinates are (0,0). Any steps are measured in “units” away from this location. A coordinate of (1,0) would be 1 unit to the right and 0 units up. This would place us on the x-axis 1 unit to the right of the origin (0,0). The axes are neutral being in not any quadrant. If we moved from (1,0) up 1 unit we would be at (1,1). The quadrants have ± signs showing the quality of x and y for each region.

In the 1st  quadrant both values are positive:  (+,+)	both positive. Move right and up.	
In the 2nd  quadrant both values are mixed:     (–,+)	here x is negative because we moved left from 0
In the 3rd  quadrant both values are negative: (–,–)	both x and y are negative because we moved left and down
In the 4th  quadrant both values are mixed:     (+,–)  	here y is negative because we moved down

Graphs use functions to plot points on the grid. There are pre-algebra graphs using stem and leaf and scatter plots. These are used for science data and financial data. There are geometry and trig graphs for drawing geometric shapes and sines waves. There are also calculus graphs for transforms, integrals and ODEs and PDEs, which are ordinary derivatives and partial derivatives. We are interested right now in functions.

A function is an operation using variables to calculate many answers as points. The points connect and make lines called “graphs” or “functions”. The image or an equation can be called the function. Any arithmetic or higher equation can be written as a function. We can graph points using a graphing calculator or we can make a table with values and then graph the function by hand using graphing paper. The website Desmos has a very good graphing calculator while the free one on Windows PC is okay but clumsy. 

On page 36 of “Polynomial Operations” we had a function already stating: “I will double any offer plus $1 ”. 
If I wanted to graph this first I would make a table and then find points. For a function we need three things an equation, an input, and an output:

f(x) = 2x+1      where “double any offer” is 2x and “plus $1” is +1
X = any number
Y = total price
point
0
1
(0,1)
1
3
(1,3)
2
5
(2,5)
3
7
(3,7)
4
9
(4,9)
 x is our input that we choose. When we chose a value for x it is no longer an unknown but some number we assign to it. Then we substitute that number by erasing x and putting it in its place. We do the operations and get a single number. That single number replaces the y variable. 

For a point (x,y) we have two unknowns both x and y. We create a function called f(x) = 2x+1. Since f(x) is really y we can write y = 2x+1.  We are going to make a table, calculate some y values and then plot them on a graph.

2x+1  =y		      (x,y)     Replace x and y with your input for x and your output (meaning answer) for y.	
2(1)+1=y
        3=y    we have point (1,3)	
2(2)+1 = 5	         point (2,5)
2(3)+1 = 7	         point (3,7)
2(4)+1	= 9	         point (4,9)

This function is called a linear equation since it has a degree of 1 and makes a 1 dimensional line when plotted.  

Linear equations

Linear equations take a number then multiply it and either add or subtract from it. There are three ways to write a linear equation that are useful; standard form, y intercept form, and point slope form.

Standard form: Ax+By =C							
Y intercept form: y = Mx+b							
Point slope form: y – y1 = M(x – x1)
formula for slope: M = y2–y1/x2–x1 

Standard form is when two unknown sums equal a known total.
These are old problems relating to age or combinations like:          		graph of f(x) = 2x+1 points with intercepts (0,1) & (–½,0)	

“I have 70% hamburger and 93% hamburger how many pounds of each do I need to make a 5 pound mix of 85%?”  “If I need make a pie for  $1.75lb. how many apples do I buy at $2.63 a pound and at $1.25?”. 

Point slope is when you know one point on a graph and slope and want to use it to find the equation for the line. There are applications for this but off the top of my head I could not tell you. 

Intercept form is the easiest to use and is used to graph lines and calculate rates of change using slope. The graph above was drawn using this one.   

Slope is the angle to the x axis the make but more precisely it is a ratio of x:y written as  y/x . 
The formula for slope M = (y2 – y1)/(x2 – x1) needs two points to calculate slope. Using the first two points from our table (0x1,1y1);(1x2,3y2) we can calculate slope:  (3–1)/(1–0) = 2/1 = 2 = M. We can use any two points as long as we are consistent in subtracting. Mixing a points values with another will not work  y2 – y1/x1 – x2 or y1 – y2/x2–x1.

In other words we can use (y2 – y1)/(x2 – x1) or (y1 – y2)/(x1 – x2) but not (y2 – y1)/(x1 – x2) or (y1 – y2)/(x2 – x1)
For the first point has subscript 1 as in (x1,y1) and second point has subscript 2 as in (x2,y2).

A linear equation with multiply a number then add a sum to give an answer. This creates an ordered pair that we use to plot the points. The points go no forever since numbers never end giving us infinite solutions. From a glance we can see patterns on a large scale and make decisions, mostly business based, about our options and how to proceed in a given situation. Business uses charts to track sales or trends or to impress clients and win new contracts. The stocks market displays financial data using charts and graphs. Graph are very popular for business because you can see a lot of information at once. 

 Function defined plainly
				y = x+1 then f (x) = x+1		y =f(x)

F or f is does not mean variable for f(x).  The “ ƒ ” is rarely stylized as lowercase Latin f that is a shorthand notation for “function”. Do NOT multiply the the left side of the equation. We abbreviate function as “func”.

“Function of (x)” is stating that the output of (x) is given by the equation on the right side of the equals sign. Output is defined as the y value of an ordered pair. Input is what number we replace x with. An output is just the answer to an equation. We solve for x and then plug it in to solve for y. We solve for x by choosing one that will suit our needs. Doing this is called defining the variable. Giving the variable definition means we erase it and write a number instead so we can actually do math. There are methods to pick good numbers for x we will learn.

The “x” is in brackets to indicate that it is a number in a series and not in parentheses as used in  multiplication. As parentheses indicate multiplication in algebra you will see calculators use brackets for f[x] most times but in text it is f(x) = y because assumes using an infinite domain of (–∞,∞) as opposed to a finite one of [x1,x2] as calculators might have. When you see f(x) say “f of x” or “function of x”. 

Functions create ratios between variable usually x and y. We are comparing two different quantities. 
A function tries to make one variable bigger or smaller than the other. 

y= x+1			this means that x needs to add 1 to equal y. Then y is bigger.
ƒ [x] = x+1		f(x) =y so we can use either label at will.

The function is the equation we will solve for one (x,y) group, called an ordered pair, where x is called “input” and “y is called output”.

Types of functions : linear, polynomial, exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric
f(x) = Mx+b				where m is slope, x is   k is some constant for the y intercept
f(x) = Ax2+Bx+C			coefficients a,b,c…  where A is leading coefficient and x is base
f(x) = ax 				where a is base and x is exponent 
f(x) = loga(x)				where a is base and x product		
f(x) = sin(x)				x is input of a trig function, here sine is used					

F of x means “function of x”. Function is written on calculators as func. You chose a number for x then substitute the number you chose into your equation. Function notation is: f(x) = some equation. When you find a value for the right side of the equation your work looks like: ƒ [x]= answer = the number we use for y. 
This describes a Cartesian pair. Cartesian pairs “map” a ratio, also called slope, between x & y values.

y= x+1 		This is our function. We need to pick a value for x. We choose 0.
y= 0+1			Substitution
y= 1 			Solved giving us point (0,1)

This means that our Cartesian pair is (0,1). We have infinite pairs since we can choose any number for x and it will have a matching y value. The function y = x+1 will mean that for every part y is one more than x:
This means that our pair is (1,2). Using a different x will produce a different y. Choosing for x is called “picking an input”. We input our number for x. Solving is called “receiving an output”. For y = x+1:

If x = 1 then (1)+1 = 2			y = 2 		If x is 1 and y is 2 our  (x,y) pair is (1,2)
If x = 2 then (2)+1 = 3			y = 3		If x is 1 and y is 2 our  (x,y) pair is (2,3)
If x = 3 then (3)+1 = 4			y = 4		If x is 1 and y is 2 our  (x,y) pair is (3,4)
If x = 4 then (4)+1 = 5			y = 5		If x is 1 and y is 2 our  (x,y) pair is (4,5)
The x-axis is a horizontal number line. The y-axis is a vertical number line. They intersect at a 90° angle at the point (0,0). The intersection point is called the origin. This is for all grids. Every unit is equally spaced from each other. 

The grid is numbered like this.		We plot points and label them like this.	Then we draw a line.

A line in geometry is said to go on forever in both directions. A linear equation has a line that goes in both directions forever. Later in geometry the explanations get more technical. Using the function y = x+1 write a table showing the points on the graph with the blue line drawn.


y =x+1
x
y
(x,y)
–4 
–3
(–4,–3)
–3
–2
(–3,–2)
–2
–1
(–2,–1)
–1
0
(–1,0)
0
1
(0,1)
1
2
(1,2)
2
3
(2,3)
3
4
(3,4)
4
5
(4,5)
 
Study the table and how it is setup. We write the equation at the top. This equation is called our function. 
We make columns for x and y. Making a column for (x.y) showing them together is optional but very helpful. 
The x column is a list of x values. x values can be any number we want. It depends on what parts of the line we want to study. For starters it is good to start at “x=0” and then add 1 every row. The y column is a list of y-values. Once we say what number we are using for x we plug that number in for x and solve for y. Once we solve for y we write the number. This creates an x,y pair which is called an “ordered pair” and uses this notation (x,y). 

I will demonstrate how to solve for y using the function f(x) = x+1 and for a polynomial:

f(x) = x+1		write a function using “f(x)” notation
f(–4) = –4+1		plug in any value for x. Anywhere the is “x” replace with the number you are using.
f(–4) = –3		spoken as: “the function of –4 is – 3” or you could say “f of –4 is – 3” 

f(x) = x2+3x+7		this is a polynomial function
f(–5) = (–5)2+3(–5)+7	plugging in a random number for x
f(–5) = 25 –15+7	
f(–5) = 17		(–5,17)	this is a point that exists on the quadratic.  
y = 17			(–5,17)

I used Microsoft calculator to graph both functions. The linear equation is a line and the quadratic makes a shape called a parabola. The point (–5,17) is found by moving –5 units on the x-axis and 17 units on the y-axis. This is easier to show on Desmos which I highly prefer and recommend. Try it yourself. Type in equations we have done or make your own. Or make your own formulas by creating variables and using different values for your variables. Start basic first then add complexity later. Eventually the graphs should show you answers to real life applications. Applications are also called “word problems”.  Application is how you apply it you your life. Not because I tell you it does but because you tell yourself it does. At the end of the book I will give applications. I do not have any applications for these type of problems right now but studying them helps learn the next math and the math after that. This is a basic primer to gear students for calculus and statistics which will help you in your real life much more. Algebra problem will be “work, rate, and mixture” problems. Geometry problems will deal with physical dimensions like area and volume of solid shapes using algebra notation and formulas like functions.

f(x) = x2+3x+7	this is a polynomial function. If we choose values for x then solve for y we find points that form a parabola shape. For a linear equation the points form a line. We can use decimals for x like 1.1 and 1.2 or 1.00001 and 1.00002. We can add as many zeros and create points that are infinitely close. This means that as locations the locations touch and when graphed make a solid line with no gaps. We can use fractions for x like ½, ⅓ or any other fraction. The only thing we can not do in a function is have an equation that somehow divides by zero. When this happens we have something called a domain error. 

Domain is the set of numbers x is allowed to be. If we had y = 2x then our function takes a number and multiplies it by 2. We can multiply any number by 2 so we say the domain of x is (–∞,∞). This means any number from negative infinity to positive infinity can be substituted for x. Once we have a number for x we call this “defining x”. Defining a variable is when you set it equal to a constant. We define x by rewriting our equation with a number instead of x. If x = 3 then y = 2x becomes y = 2∙3. y will then equal 6 because we defined x as 3.        



Domain is the set of possible x values. Range is the set of possible y values. There are equations that limit what x or y can be. For example If I had the function f(x) = 1/x I can not choose x to be 0 because I would get f(0) = 1/0 and there is a rule called “division by zero” that says division by zero is undefined. There is that word again “define”. Define means to know what number the variable represents. Define can also mean other things but in general the definition is the answer. If x=4 then x is defined as 4, since we have “something = 4”. 
So the answer to “something” is 4. 

Take 2+2 =4. 4 is the answer to 2+2. This is called an equivalence. We have an equals sign with two quantities on either side. Left side:right side is 2+2 = 4. In general “this = that”. The point is we can write a number different ways. This is a critical concept in all math but especially this point and beyond. You have to walk away with this understanding for any situation. We can write four as “4” or as “2+2”. We can write function of x as “f(x)” or “y”.  

If x = 4 then 4 = x. “The answer to four” is x and “the answer to x” is four. Very important.
We if x=4 we are not really stating a problem to be solved, it is solved. It is the solution and therefore the answer.
The solution = the answer. 

The goal is to teach that x = some number is not a problem but an equality of two groups. 

4=4		this is called reflexive			
x=x		this is called reflexive			

If x = 4 then they are both 4. 

x = 4				this is called substitution. This the basis for equivalence statements.

When we write an “=” sign we are equating two things. On page 44 I said you could equate an equation.    
From page 43: “(j)(x+3)            substitute j for x+2 (yes you can use a variable for a sum or even entire equation)”

Note: j = x+2 is an entire equation and that x+2 is a mathematical expression called a binomial. For something to be an equation it needs an equal sign. Having the binomial x+2 without an equals sign makes it an “expression” rather than a full equation. We treat expressions like equations or sometimes call expressions equations but they are not. This is technical. The difference is whether a person is speaking English correctly which translates to whether they are doing math correctly. If you do not understand what the words or notation or symbols mean how can you do math? 

Example: The phrase “do your homework” can be made a sentence but is still a phrase.

1. “do your homework”					a phrase
2. “Do your homework.”					a sentence
3. “Do your homework or you're grounded.”		a compound sentence
4. “Do your homework...”				a cutoff sentence

If we add a period it becomes a sentence. If we leave it off it isn't. While technically a phrase we can use it as a sentence. This is bad grammar and syntax but people will understand you. If you lack strong reading skills your work will suffer. Bad communication and comprehension follows. This goes beyond getting the correct answer but understanding how and why. Understanding what 2+2 equals is different than understanding why 2+2=4.

1. 2+2				a phrase
2. 2+2 = 4				an equation
3. 2+2 = 4 and x = 4		a compound equality
4. 2+2 = 4 and x =		an incomplete compound inequality

Starting from basic applications

A linear equation performs multiplication. That is all it does. If someone says “linear equation” it is a fancy way  There are three different way to write a linear equation. You can convert from one formula to another. Form is another way to say formula. A formula is the notation we are using. Notation is any formulas or symbols used in the equation. Every lesson we learn new notation and introduce it as it appears. Math is just symbols and higher math takes basic arithmetic and garbles it in code. All math is code and learning notation is the way to decode it. 

Standard form: Ax+By =C							
This is used to find the intercepts. All linear equations have y and x intercepts. Rare in graphing. Used for sums.

Standard form takes two ingredients called A and B and combines them to make an ingredient called C. 
The literal interpretation is mixing ratios like a cocktail made for 5% alcohol and 10% alcohol mixed to make a drink that is 7% alcohol. These are real life problems not pure math and just find a number. The number has to represent something more than just a dot on a grid. Our hypothetical drink would have some ratio of x:y to make 
a 7% mixture. If we made a 1:2 ratio then we would have 1 part A and 2 parts B. This makes 3 parts not 2. Ratios are different from standard fractions. They require in depth instruction. First lets manipulate the formulas to better understand them and talk about ratios later.

y intercept form: y = Mx+b
This gives a form that shows the height of the point that intercepts the y-axis. This point is called the y-intercept. This is useful if you need an equation and use values that are close to the y-axis. This is used in graphing lines.
Useful if you know or need slope and/or y-intercept. Most popular.

This is popular early on for business equations that show multiples of some value like x amount of units equals y amount of dollars or science applications like tracking rainfall, population, or anything else that grows at a steady rate.					
		
Point slope form: y – y1 = M(x – x1)
This is useful if you are using points far from the axis. This is used in calculus when calculating tangents of curves. Useful if you have two points or if you have one point and slope. Less popular.

We can convert from one formula to another by using algebra. Algebra means rewriting from one form to another. The “algebra” is the notation which people call, “the language”.

Ax+By = C			standard
x+y = c			the coefficients are not important 
y = –x+c			this is y-int form except it uses “c” and calls it “b” 

Whether you call it b or c or anything else the constant added to x will be you y value. Observe:

y = –(x) +c			let x = 0
y =  –(0)+c			there is no such thing as negative zero, –0 is 0
y = c				our y value is 0 giving us point (x,0) where x is undefined    

If x = 0 then from the origin (0,0) we did not move left or right any units. Our x value is 0. If y = c then from the origin (0,0) we moved “c” units up or down. Whatever “c” is that will be the height of our point.

y = –(x) +c			let y = 0
0 = – (x)+c			we have point (–x,c) which is the x-int
				this is x-int but we have no values except that we move to the left because x is (–) 
				if we had numbers we would know what the x-int and y-int are

Ax+By =C			this is standard form for a linear equation
By = –Ax +C			this is ugly way to write y-int formula 
y = Mx +b			we write this way is better. We use b for vertical rise but some use other letters
				note: By and Mx+b are different “b”. b is vertical rise and B is cof of y if it has 1
y = Mx+b			
y – b = Mx			subtract b from both sides
y – y1 = M(x –x1)		rename b as y1 and x as the quantity x–x1

We did it. We rewrote all formulas using algebra. Huge success. This means that for a line using any of these forms  or even the ugly ones we stated the equation for a unique line. If we put any of these forms into a graphing calculator they would all draw the same line. Note that we had – (0)+b earlier. Using commutation we change order to b – 0 = b, and  0 cancels. Also there is no such thing as “negative 0” as it is neutral so it is just 0.

5 – 4 = 1		five has a “hidden” plus sign because it is positive 
–4+5 =1  		the –4 is really –+4. the signs do not match so it is negative  

5–0   = 5
–0+5 = 5  		 we do not write “ – ” in front of 0
0+5   = 5 		

We went from standard to y intercept to point slope. What a coup de gracè. Using algebra we can rewrite any of the forms to any of the other forms. There are 3 choose 2 combinations so 6 possible conversions. That is too many to do but practice for yourself and your graphing skills will be stronger not to mention your algebra as well.

Let's work with y = 2x+1. Let's try to convert it:

y = 2x+1		intercept form				y = 2x+1		intercept form 	
y – 2x = 1		standard form 				y – 1 = 2(x – x1) 	point form 

y = 2x+1		if want to know where the line intercepts the x axis...
0 = 2x+1		then the height above the x axis will be 0. Use y=0 	
–1 = 2x		subtract “b” from both sides
–½ = x  		divide both sides by 2
(0,–½)			this is the point for the x-intercept

y = 2x+1		if want to know where the line intercepts the y axis...
y = 2(0)+1		then the horizontal distance from y axis will be 0. Use x=0
y = 1			hmm...
(0,–½)			this is the point for the y-intercept

1. using 0 for x or y will give you the other variables intercept
2. intercept form gives you the intercept already with b as the vertical increase

This is a such a simple function we can calculate points mentally. What are the y values for 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10?
[(0,1);(1,3);(2,5);(3,7);(4,9);(5,11);(6,13);(7,15);(8,17);(9,19);(10,21)]	I notice a pattern. The outputs are all odd.

If inputs are integers this function gives all outputs as odd numbers, why is this so?
Let's do a different function y = 2x. Can you make a prediction about the results if we use integer inputs?

Note: Brackets are not necessary but semicolons are. Semicolons are ugly but commas are hard to read.

f(x) = 2x	f(x) = 2x	f(x) = 2x	f(x) = 2x	f(x) = 2x	f(x) = 2x	f(x) = 2x	f(x) = 2x	
f(0) = 2∙(0)	f(1) = 2∙(1)	f(2) = 2∙(2)	f(3) = 2∙(3)	f(4) = 2∙(4)	f(5) = 2∙(5)	f(6) = 2∙(6)	f(7)=2(7)
y = 0		y = 2		y = 4		y = 6		y = 8		y = 10		y = 12		y = 14

They are all even! We learned an important fact about number theory using functions. 

1. Any number times two will result in an even number~ the way to write with functions is y = 2x
2. Adding 1 to any even will result in an odd~ The way to write with function is y = 2x+1

We do functions to either solve a real world application or to study patterns. In graphing functions we can see a large amount of information quickly. This helps us see the bigger picture than just the answer to a single equation. A function shows the answers to many equations of a formula, infinitely many. 
 
Last page I asked why you thought the outputs were all odd. I care more about getting you to think creatively than making you do a bunch of complicated equations. People like to solve a problem and move on but do not take time to think about their answers or what they mean. The meaning will be related to a pattern of some type. Understanding patterns in life is important. While it is important to solve math quickly for work there are calculators for that. A calculator can get an answer faster than a person but it can not think and understand what that answer means. 

When I asked you to do a prediction that is called forecasting. The news has weather forecasting based on graphing weather patterns and also financial forecasting graph stock and market data.
Seeing patterns in life is critical for making the right decisions at the right time. We use math for that to get money, self preservation and quality of life. If you keep making the same mistakes in life you are missing the patterns you need to notice or you are deliberately ignoring them. 

Both y=2x and y=2x+1 are shown graphed together. Graphing two functions at once is more powerful than separately as we can compare the two functions side by side. We look for patterns and try to extrapolate any data we can. 
What patterns if any do you see?

When we have two functions graphed together we name them alphabetically f(x), g(x), h(x)... and so on.

f(x) = 2x		has y intercept 0
g(x) = 2x+1		has y intercept 1

For business the y intercept is often called “initial value”. In a way it says we should look at the graph by starting where x = 0. If you deposit money in an account that earns interest the initial value is your deposit. Over time you can graph how your money grows. The x value counts time in days, months, years, or in the case of the stock market even hours. The y value counts price in dollars. If you hear the term initial value think y intercept where before any time has passed the starting value is on the y axis somewhere. It takes practice to read and interpret graphs skillfully.

Notice how the two graphs do not intercept each other. 
This is because they have the same slope. 
Two lines with the same slope are parallel.
 
Solving systems of Equations
When two functions cross each other we want to know at what point this happens. It represents a state of equilibrium where both function has the same ordered pair. Depending on application this can be a good thing to aim for or bad thing to avoid. This relates to point of diminishing returns, point of no return, and point of gained value. Systems use the standard format Ax+By = C. 

Claim:	If we have two functions then we can find a point where they meet.

If      then 2x = 2x+1. Is this a true statement? no. 

2x+0 = 2x+1		this doesn't look right
      0 ≠  1         	0 does not equal 1

These two functions are said to lack reflexivity. If they were reflexive they would both equal thew same number at the end. Because they same same slope they have the same angle to the x axis, about 63.43°, so they with never cross. More of a lesson of geometry or trig but slope is the same thing as tangent and these have a tangent of 2.   


Using the function h(x) = x we create a new function that crosses both.
We can see that f(x) = 2x and h(x) = x share the point (0,0) but do not know where h(x) crosses the g(x). We can solve using one of two methods. Colors blue;red;purple match the graphs to right.

Notice how the h(x) intercepts f(x). What is the point this happens? Will this happen with every set of two functions?
Use an algebraic method to find where h(x) intercepts the other two. 

We can solve by substitution or elimination. Below equations show x values in blue y values in red.

Substitution
f(x) =2x						g(x)= 2x +1 				 
    y =2x	use “x=y” for y			    y = 2x +1 				  
   (x)=2x	looks wrong...				   (x) = 2x+1       looks wrong...
   x/2 = x	how can half of x equal x?		   –x = 1	   subtract – 2x from both sides 
   f(x/2) = 2x      need real number for input		    x = –1	   multiply both sides by –1 to make x positive 
		cant use variable as input	          g(–1) = 2(–1)+1  	
f(x/2) = x 	useless but true   (x,2x)		     y= –1	 (–1,–1)	

Elimination subtracts on equation from the other					
   (2x = y)			2x+1 = y			x = y
–  (x = y)		         –  x+0 = y			0=0	 
     x  = 0			 x+1=0				
   2(0)= y			x = –1	
       0= 0       (x,y)=(0,0)	2(–1)+1 = y becomes –2+1 = y becomes –1 = y becomes (–1,–1)

Using substitution did not work because we got a solution point of (x,2x) which was just our original equation y=2x rewritten.  It take two “x” to equal one “y”, x+x =y, x+x = 2x, our ratio is 2x =1y. To use substitution we need a variable clearly defined. This is dealt with in arithmetic series explaining the difference between an explicit definition and an implicit definition. Using elimination we get (0,0) which we can see from the graph.

(0,0) = (x,2x)   because 0 = 2(0) and because 0/2 = 2∙0 which was x/2 =2x. x = 0 and y = 0. We can not use x/2 to plug back into our equation to solve because x/2 is not a constant. For a function to work it needs x to be explicitly defined. 
x = 0 is explicit, x/2 is implicit. Explicit will state a constant, implicit will imply a ratio.
Recap
1.    f(x) = 2x						g(x) = 2x +1 				h(x) = x 
2.        y = 2x	change f(x) to y			    y  = 2x +1 	   change g(x) = y     	     y = x 
3.       (x)= 2x	looks wrong...				   (x) = 2x+1       looks wrong...
4.       x/2 = x	how can half of x equal x?		    –x = 1	   subtract – 2x from both sides 
5.    f(x/2) = 2x      need real number for input		      x = –1	   multiply both sides by –1
6. 		cant use variable as input	            g(–1) = 2(–1)+1  	
7.   f(x/2) = x 	useless but true   (x,2x)		        y= –1		 (–1,–1)

We had three functions: 1st  f(x) = 2x	 	2nd   g(x) = 2x+1		3rd    g(x)  = x  

f(x) and g(x) are parallel because they have the same slope of 2.
g(x) does not have a slope of 2 so will intercept both of them. Intercept means to pass through.
We want to find the points where lines intercept. This point is called “the solution” to a system of equations.
The solution is a point that both lines share so it will have the same (x,y) values. 

Solving by substitution if fairly simple. First we have g(x) = x and f(x) = 2x. Right away we know the solution is (0,0). We physically see it on the graph drawn and there is no “b” value so the y-intercept formula (0,b) changes to (0,0). They both intercept each other at the same y-intercept. This happens a lot. However trying to solve through substitution fails because we do not have a b value to offset the equation.

We have to change function notation to “y” because we are solving for y, not inputting any values for x.
Use f(x) when you need to input a value, use y when you are solving for y.

y= 2x → x =2x  We said this looks wrong because how can x =x+x? They are different “x”. Both are 0. 0= 0+0.
x/2 =x	              We tried to clear 2x by dividing by 2 on both sides but got no where. 
		   x= x+x  changed to ½x + ½x = x. Instead of 1 = 1+1 we get ½ =½+½ .”

f(x/2)=x  We tried to solve for y using x/2 as an input but it failed. X/2 is not a constant. It is a rational expression. 	   We need a constant to function. A rational expression is a fraction containing a variable namely “x”. 
               Later when you see phrases like “a function must be well defined” it means “x must be a constant”.
	   To define a function x must equal a constant. You can not input a variable for x.
   
f(x/2) = x 	The only value that satisfies both y = x and y =x/2 is 0. Our answer is (x,2x)=(0,2∙0).

That was fundamental and hard. Inputs must be reals, 0/x =0, and using subtraction works best with explicit values not implied ones. Explicit definitions will state a constant, implicit definitions will imply a ratio.

y  = 2x +1 	  	solve for by changing g(x) = y 	 
(x) = 2x+1 	  	substitute x for y since that was what was given from x =y equivalence.
 –x = 1		  	what you do one side you have to do on the other to keep equation balanced.
   x = –1	  	what you do one side you have to do on the other to keep equation balanced.
g(–1) = 2(–1)+1  	x = –1 so input it back into the original function g(x) 
       y= –1		y= – 1 so our lines intercept at (–1,–1).

This can be written as a string of polynomials.
1. f(x):	(2x = y) – (x = y)   →   2x–x = y–y   → x =0 because 2x–x = x and y–y = 0. 
2. g(x):	(2x+1=y)–(x+0=y) →   2x+1–x+0 = y–y  → x+1 = 0 → x = –1  
3. h(x):	x = y is pretty much famously given as 0=0 for both its x and y intercepts. This matched f(x).

When a function does not have a vertical increase it will always have point (0,0) as it's y and x intercepts. This point (0,0) is always called the origin. With out + or –  “b” a function always passes through the origin.
Whether you are solving with substitution or subtraction you get x=constant. 
Substitute the constant back into the original function to solve for y.  Abstract word problem might be more helpful:

What two integers have a sum of 84 if one is three times the other?

n+3n = 84		this is standard form ax+by = c
4n = 84
n = 21
3n = 63
21+63 = 84 

What two consecutive integers have a sum 67?

2n+1 = 67		this was our function from above f(x) = 2x+1. 2x is changer to 2n
2n = 66
n = 33
n1 =33 n2 =34		use subscripts to indicate (1st number) + (2nd number) =  (Total)
33+34 = 67

Any number times 2 is even ex. 2∙3= 6 17∙2 = 34 113∙2 = 226. As a rule: only way to get an odd is to 2n+1.
We were supposed to write as x+(x+1)=67 but I skipped the associative step since this is so basic.

What two consecutive odd numbers produce 1763?

x(x+2)=1763
x2+2x= 1763
x2+2x –1763 = 0				use quadratic formula since number big or...

√1763 ≈ 41.98	try x =41 and x+2 = 43
41∙43 = 1763					41 and 43 are the numbers

The product of x = 9 and y is 41 less than the sum of x and y. Solve for y. 

9y +41 = x+y
9y +32 =y
8y= – 32
y = –4

What two natural numbers produce 255 and sum to 32?		
m+n=32   and mn=255	→m =32–n	

1+31 = 32		2+30 = 32		3+29 = 32		4+28 = 32		5+27 = 32		
6+26 = 32		7+25 = 32		8+24 = 32		9+23 = 32		10+22 = 32		
11+21 = 32 		12+20 = 32		13+19 = 32		14+18 = 32		15+17 = 32	15∙17= 255

Use quadratic formula or guess 15 times                 
Algebra is about formula not guessing                    
I want to teach process and then get into problems

solve n2 –32m+255 	or – 255+32n – n2 , both are the same roots for n.

32±√1024 –1020 → 32±2/2 → 15 or 17		speed version shown of (–b±√b2 –4ac)/2a   
Function notation: f(x) = (x + 1) ·10  		is the same thing as 		Intercept notation: y =10x + 10

The first one is function notation and the second one is y-intercept notation. Line graphs use these notations called formulas to find chart points. A chart point looks like (x,y). The x is the number of units moved to the right on the x axis and y is the number of units moved up the y axis.

f(x) = (x+1) · 10  			Using function notation we choose 5 for x.
f(5) = (5 + 1) · 10			Inputting 5 for x. (Substitution)
f(5) = (6) · 10				adding
f(5) = 60				solving for f(5)

There are no more steps to do so this is solved. Function of 5 equals 60. Our pair is (5,60). 
That means when x is 5 y is 60. As such  f(5) = 60.   Remember “the function of x is y”, because  f(x) = y . 
Using y-intercept notation will give the same pair because algebraically it is the same as function notation. You use function notation when you want to find further pairs of (x,y),  you use y-intercept notation when you want to find the value of y when x is zero or when want to find the slope. 

The y value is called the y-intercept if x is zero. Using zero for x will cancel out the x term leaving the constant term as the y-intercept. The coefficient of x is the slope. Slope is the rate of change. You can use slope and rate of change interchangeably.

y =10x + 10 					Using y-intercept notation
y= 10 · (5) + 10				Using 5 for x
y= 50 + 10					multiplying
y= 60						solving
		
Because y = 60 when x is 5 our pair is (5,60). This means that both formulas are equivalent.

In this sense we can consider a formula to be some quantity of x to equal a quantity of y. 
Therefore a formula is a ratio of x to y. (5,60) is 5x for every 60y or 60y/5x.  When we reduce we get a slope of 12/y. This called “ delta of 12y/5x”. In function notation formula: ƒ(x) = Δ12y/5x.  Delta is Greek letter  for slope. It means “change”. It is saying “slope is 12y over 5x”. Also “the change in y over x”.

We might hear someone say, “delta y over x” or in calculus, “Delta dy/dx” but we hardly use  for anything. It is not an operator so it does change anything. It is not a constant like π nor is it a variable. It just means slope and we use capital “M” for that. If M was being used as a variable someone might use delta to reference slope but slope is always given as y/x.

Because ordered pairs come in set notation it is understandable the desire to use associate functions using parentheses. This is common practice but improper. Parentheses for f(x) ties the idea of (x,y) together to imply set notation not multiplication.

Slope: M = (y2 – y1)/(x2 –x1)
The formula for slope requires two points. Any two points work. If a line passes through the origin we can easily find slope. If it doesn't then using the y intercept is convenient. Any two points that are easy to subtract are convenient. Using  y =10x + 10 has 10x so slope is 10. This means for every change 1 in x we have a change of 10 in y. Every point with integer values is one unit to the left and and ten units up.

y =10x + 10 	  find y intercept 			    M = 60-10/5-0		find slope using (0,10) and (5,60)
y =10(0) + 10    					    M = 50/5		using 0 makes finding x easy
y = 0+10						    M = 10		 any two points will have same slope	
y= 10		y=10 when x=0 (0,10) is y-intercept 	    
Slope is the ratio of y value/x value. We had point (5,60) and (0,10) for y intercept. It gave us M = 10. 
The y intercept form gets its name because the b value is the y value in (0,y).

y-int = (0,y)	make x=0 to cancel Mx leaving only b
x-int = (x,0)     make y=0 to cancel y then solve for x

1. y =5x+3 			y=5x+3				
2. y=0+3				0=5x+3				zeroing out the other variable
3. y=3	(0,3)		          –3/5 =x      (–3/5,0)		isolate variable

For x we had to do more work. The third step was a compound operation. We subtracted 3 from both sides and then divided both sides by 5 to isolate x.

We are mostly interested in y-intercept and not x-intercept. Most graphing is done in the first quadrant where all values are positive. Other quadrants contain negative values which might be hard to interpret or nonsense.
Most measurements start at x =0. By definition this point will be the y intercept. For this reason we use the y intercept form a lot.

We found slope using  M = 60-10/5-0. If we picked the points in a different order we would get the same slope:

(0,10) and (5,60) can be 10–60/0–5 = –50/–5 = 10. We can subtract point1 from point2 or subtract point2 from point2 but we can not use values from one point for another point. We can do math in the () as well.

1. (0–5,10–60) 	= (–5,–50)  	⸫ y/x =    –50/–5 	which is 10	  correct				
2. (5 –0,60–10) 	= (5,50)     	⸫ y/x =      50/5     	which is 10	  correct
3. (0–5,60–10) 	= (–5,50)   	 ⸫ y/x =    50/–5 	which is –10   do not mix values with wrong point
4. (5–0,10–60)	 = (5, –50)	 ⸫ y/x = –50/5 	which is –10   do not mix values with wrong point

In the first example both x and y are negative so they cancel leaving a positive 10. Example 2 also has slope 10. 
Example 3 and 4 are wrong because instead of using point (0,10) for intercept is got confused and used (0,60).
This gave both wrong examples a slope of –10. You can have negative slope for a line but not like this.

If line moves right and up then slope is positive.      ↗
If line moves right and down then slope is negative.↘
x values are always plotted with increasing values to the right while y values can increase or decrease moving ↨.

If y increases with x it is a direct variation. 
If y decreases with x it is a indirect variation. Also called inverse relationship. 
There are many times the word inverse comes up.

The function “y= Mx” states y is a product of the factors M∙x. We multiply slope with x. This make slope “M” the coefficient of x. We had “y =10x+10” where Mx is 10x. In 10x, 10 is the coefficient of x. In general:

If x = 0 then y is...
If x = 1 then y is...
If x = 2	 then y is..	

We make a table of x and y values and choose specific or random constants for x. An easy way to generate points is to use integers starting at 0 then “+1” every term. This creates many x to quickly solve many y mentally. Since every “step” of x is 1 unit any y≥1 has a more vertical slope. Any y≤1 has a more horizontal slope. The variables compete to see which one is greater or “gaining” This is useful when comparing two graphs or using exponential charts.
Direct and Indirect variation 
1. If M is positive you have a positive slope    ↗ 	 0°<M<90°.
2. If M is 0 you have a horizontal line            ↦	 0°
3. If M is negative you have a negative slope  ↘        –90°<M<0°     coterminal with    270°<M<0°.
4. If M = 1 you have a special function where y=x+b. If b = 0 then you have a very special function called the identity function. The identity function helps evaluate other functions. 	
5. If M = y/0 you have a vertical line “⊥”.


y=x is a line that goes over 1 unit and up one unit.
From geometry/trig this is a special value on the unit circle. Using Pythagoras theorem you can find the ratios of a triangle that has base 1 and height 1 to have a hypotenuse of slope 1 and a ∠45°. If y/x is 1/1 then your line is the diagonal of a square. 
You are bisecting a ∠90° which is “45°   given by	 ∟/2”.





Direct variation means that you are multiplying x and as x gets bigger y gets bigger. Indirect variation means that you are multiplying x with a negative coefficient and as x gets bigger y gets smaller.

y = 3x				y= –3x 
(1,3)				(1,–3)
(2,6)				(2,–6)
(3,9)... y gets bigger		(3,–9)...y gets smaller

For y =3x slope is 3. We have 3/1 . All it is doing is counting multiples of 3.  x acts as a term number and y acts as the value of the term. X is cardinal and y is ordinal, x is 1st term 2nd term 3rd term and y is (3,6,9...). If we wanted to instead count y by 1's we would need to divide both numerator and denominator of slope by y.

y/x becomes   y÷y/x÷y becomes 1/x÷y making up one unit and over a fraction of a unit. Slope = 3 becomes:
3/1 becomes   1/1÷3 becomes 1/⅓ . We move ⅓ to the right and up 1.

Our slope would still be 3 but we are moving ⅓ of x over and ⅓ of y up when we are plotting or tracking points.

For a negative slope: y = –2x+4   
To graph by hand get graph paper and pencil. 
Find y intercept at (0,4) and make that your first point.
Find x intercept and make that your second point. 
It can be found by using slope to count. Go over 1 down 2, over 1, down two stop at (2,0).
This graph you can count to find x-int but other graphs use methods shown earlier. 
Points are: (0,4);(1,2)(2,0);(3,–2);(4,–4)... 
Counting points is easy mentally; add 1 to the x value and –2 to the y value. 
Notice that as x increase y decreases. This indicates downward pattern. 
Downward patterns are called indirect or inverse variations but just mean negative slope. 
Graphs will look like one to right if they are indirect.



The next three pages are hard and very technical reading. Deals with abstract algebra and heavy on set theory.
Read what you can. Learn new vocabulary. I will dumb it down afterwards. 
The inverse of a function
A function is only invertable if it has a “ 1-1 correspondence” relationship of x to y.[1]fancy way of saying “horizontal line test”
A functions inverse takes every point of f(x) and interchanges the x and y values. (x,y) become (y,x)
It uses the x for the y value and y for the x value.
All x and y are swapped in equation: y=2x becomes x = 2y, y = 3x–4 becomes x = 3y–4  
Rewrite the equation switching x and y and you are done.
A function inputs x as a stating number to go to y. The inverse takes y and works back to find the original x.

Example of inverse function 
From x to y 
From y back to x
x
f(x)
x
f-1(x)
2
5
5
2
3
8
8
3
4
11
11
4
5
14
14
5
From x to y
From y back to x
F(2)= 5
F-1(5)= 2
F(3)= 8
F-1(8)= 3
F(4)= 11
F-1(11)= 4
F(5)= 14
F-1(14)= 5

The negative superscript -1 means inverse NOT “⅟ ” as used for reciprocal multiplication. 
The trigonometric function tan-1 uses the same notation.
It means use the inverse of tan  arc tan, not use ⅟tan.

Inverse operations go the other direction.
Subtraction is the inverse of addition.
Every operation has an inverse operation. Read table in beginning of book titled Operations on page 9.

A function may or may not have an inverse. Generally a function has an inverse if it is invertable. In plain speak that means it must pass the horizontal test. The horizontal test is the same as the vertical test for f(x) functions except that it must not have more than two x coordinates for one y output. 

Parabolas are not invertable.  
A cheat would be if you limited the domain to one side of the vertex.


Vertical Line Test:      Must not have two y's (or more) per x.
[1]Horizontal Line Test: Must not have two x's (or more) per y.


For a function to be a function: When I input a value for x that value must map to only one y value.
[1]For a function to be invertable: After getting to that y value I must be able to map back to only 1 x.

A Venn diagram is used in biology and other sciences. It is a set of circles that show an idealization where the circles overlap. Each circle contains elements of a set. Where the circles overlap those elements are shared by both sets. These are non-commutative algebras that we do not deal with in algebra 1 or 2. 
College and business math and also graduate classes or discrete mathematics for computer science uses the following page definitions. We are only interested in continuous line functions not discrete.
In set theory and the collection of sets, elements can be a member of one or many groups. If depicted using Venn diagrams then members of multiple groups will reside in the domain where there is overlap.

In number theory we have sets of numbers. For two groups we can have numbers in one group that map to numbers in the other. Depending on the mapping the set is either commutative or non-commutative. 

Noncommutative functions do not have inverses. They have many outputs for one input. Commutative functions can have inverses if they they have one output for each input and one input for each output. You have to be able to map forwards from point a to b and you have to be able to map backwards from b to a. 


I am not sure if the following is precise: A commutative function appears to be continuous while a non commutative function appears to be discrete. Inverted parabolas are not functions so they can not be considered.
While noncontinuous functions exist they fall under a different category of classification. Step functions are discrete but they are invertable. The issue of whether a function is invertable is separate from discreteness but there are analogies. 
 
y equals the function of x. The inverse of y equals the inverse function of x.
Here superscript – 1 means inverse not fraction:

y= f(x) = x+5
y-1  =f-1(x) = y+5

There are 6 combinations given 3 variables with 2 states: x, – x, y, – y, c, – c. 
C is some constant replaced with 5 for clarity:

x+5 = y
– x – 5 = –y
y – 5 = x
5 – y = – x
y – x = 5
– y + x = – 5

Special case of the identity function:
1. For linear equations with a slope of 1 the function is it's own inverse. This is a special case.
2. The function and inverse with be the same line.  They have infinite solutions.
3. The function will be parallel to the function y= x. This the “identity function” definition.

4. For every other linear function the inverse using the negative reciprocal for slope of the original
using the formula is y =(1/-M)x+b.
5. The inverse function of f(x) is 90° perpendicular to y = x. The inverse of a function is a 90° rotation.
This is the “inverse of a function” definition.


About mapping: Mapping is the basis of how functions and other topics in math work. A mapping creates a connection between two elements. In linear functions a mapping is the x linked with it's corresponding y. x1 is mapped to y1 , x2 is mapped to y2. 

A→1     A maps to 1
B→2	  B maps to 2
C→4	  C maps to 4
D→7	  D maps to 7






 Injective, Surjective and Bijective: 

Bijective sets create a “1 to 1” correspondence. One element is linked to exactly one element. 
This makes them invertable.  We use this for algebra 1. This is like a linear or certain cubics.

Bijective Sets Example
a
3
b
-4
c
12
d
7


Surjective: Every element in group y has a partner from group x. If an element in group y is not mapped to, then it is injective. It has some elements from group y that has two or more x elements mapped to it. This makes it noninvertable. If a function goes from x to y. We use these in algebra 1. This is like a quadratic.

Surjective “onto” sets
a
2
b
3
c
2
d
2


Injective: A set of elements that has a least one unmapped element. We do not use this for algebra 1. (Venn diagrams flow charts and other non commutative algebra). It has an output with no corresponding input, a y with no x. This is not a function in the commutative sense. Maybe this is covered in pre-calculus for biology.


Injective “ one to one” sets
a
1
b
2
c
3
Nothing maps to y = 4. It is hanging alone
4
 
The domain of x is the elements contained in its set. Also called the “ preimage”.
The range of y is the elements contained in it's set. Also called the “ image”.

The co-domain of y is a subset of range. The range of y contained all values or elements that can be mapped to while it's co-domain is the values that actually are mapped to. If all elements in the range are mapped to then your function is surjective.







Determining whether an equation is a function or if an equation has an inverse
passes vertical line test		passes vertical line test		fails vertical line test		passes vertical line test
passes horizontal line test		fails horizontal line test		passes horizontal line test		passes horizontal line test
an invertable function		is a function but not invertable	is not a function but is invertable	an invertable function


The vertical line test states that for an equation to be considered a function a line drawn vertically must not touch two points on the graph. All equations that are linear, quadratic, or cubic pass the vertical line test and are considered function.

The horizontal line test states that for a function to have a matching inverse function it must passes the vertical line test. Linear and cubics pass this test but quadratics fail. If a function can be inverted we call this new equation it's “inverse function”.

A linear equation is a function because when I input a constant for x and then compute the equation to solve I get a single answer for y. This will happen no matter what I substitute for x, that x will equal exactly one y.
It is invertable meaning it has a inverse function. For it's inverse, when I input a y it will output exactly one x.

A cubic equation is a function because when I input a constant for x and then compute the equation to solve I get a single answer for y. This will happen no matter what I substitute for x, that x will equal exactly one y. 
It is invertable meaning it has a inverse function. For it's inverse, when I input a y it will output exactly one x.

A quadratic equation is a function because when I input a constant for x and then compute the equation to solve I get a single answer for y. This will happen no matter what I substitute for x, that x will equal exactly one y.
It is not invertable meaning it does not have a inverse function. It fails the horizontal line test.
For it's inverse, when I input a y it will output exactly one x at the vertex and two x everywhere else. 
We call equations like this parametric and they are studied in pre-calculus.

Because a quadratic has two arms that branch to the left and right a horizontal line will touch two points that have the same y value but additive inverses for x.  The line y=4 will touch f(x)=x2 at (–2,4) and (2,4). 2 and –2 are additive inverses. This will happen will for every horizontal line passing through a quadratic, it will touch two points, except at the vertex which is a singularity composed of two points that overlap to form one point. A line going through the vertex touches only the point of inflection.  

We can generalize this with “a line y=b passes through exactly two points on a quadratic except the special case where the two points overlap which we call “vertex”.  ■

Inflection point is where a graph “turns”. Linear has no inflection points, a quadratic has one, a cubic has two.
Vertex in geometry is where two lines meet forming an angle or a corner of a polygon. Its plural is vertices.
A triangle has three vertices, a square has four. The x,y grid has one vertex at the origin (0,0) making 4 ∠90°.
Mathematicians tend to generalize for all cases. Generalize means prove. Mathematicians write proofs. These proofs are used to derive formulas. Studying math you will be asked to do proofs and derive formulas on your own. 

Finding the inverse for a function
An inverse function changes the inputs to outputs and outputs to inputs. Brief explanation:
We take a function and plot points (x,y). The inverse will have the values inverted making (y,x).
If we have a point (1,2) the inverse will be (2,1). We switch the x's with y's and y's with x's.
	    	 
Function 
Function point
Inverse function
Inverted point 
F(x) = x3 +2  
(x,x3+2)
f-1(x) = ∛(x –2) 
(∛(x –2) ,x)
f(0) = 2
(0,2)
f-1(2) = 0
(2,0)
f(1) = 3
(1,3)
f-1(3) = 1
(3,1)
f(2) = 10
(2,10)
f-1(10) = 2
(10,2)
f(3) = 27
(3,27)
f-1(27) = 3
(27,3)

1st Disclosure: A function is an equation that performs arithmetic. It can perform a single operation or multiple operations. Page 6 shows a table of operations and their inverse operations. We teach pre-algebra so that students can perform the 6 operations. We then introduce variables and then polynomials. A polynomial is a string of products being added. We then teach function notation to guide graphing solutions of polynomial equations.  

f(x) = x						f(x) = x2					f(x) = x3+1
y = x (+0)					y = x2						y = x3+1		
x = y						x = y2						x = y3 –1
f-1(x) = x (–0)					f-1(x)= x2 					f-1(x) = x3–1

The function is in blue and its inverse is in red. The output is called y or f(x), they are the same.
Invert values by swapping x and y. This is shown in black text.
 
1. The linear function x=y has inverse y=x. No operation is being performed to reverse so it just gives the output as the same number as the input. Points are ((0,0);(1,1)(2,2)...(x,x)). This is called the identity function. The ratio of x:y is 50% to 50%. It is equally balanced 1 part x equals 1 part y.

2. The quadratic function does not have an inverse. Swapping x values with y values rotates the graph 90° about the origin to the right. We can see the y axis touches two points. This fails the vertical line test so it is not considered a function. It looks like a function to me but someone made this silly rule so we are asked to obey it. The argument is that if we input 0 what is our output? Is is – 2 or 2? I would argue both but classical arithmetic forbids this. The y value is supposed to be something like price or money in an account. Is y –$2 or $2? It can't be both! So this is not a function since it disagrees with itself as to what is the single value for y is. This is why it is not a function. If you asked a banker your balance and he said he didn't know because it is either $2000 in savings or –$2000 overdrawn that would be a problem.

3. The cubic is a function whose inverse is a reflection over the identity function. Not much else to say.

2nd Disclosure
A function  performs arithmetic operations. About all you can do in math is the 6 operations which are three operations for adding and their 3 inverses for subtracting. All math is does is add a number. That's it. This is true all the way to calculus and beyond. Nothing hidden. No extras. That's it just adding numbers in strings called sums or polynomials or even series. That is all math, find your number and then add it.

Simple facts
1. The inverse of add + is subtract – 
2. The inverse of multiply ∙ is divide ÷ 
3. The inverse of power ^ is root √ 
4. Arithmetic solves a single equation
5. A function solves infinite equations. This is just a fact.

3+4=?			This is how arithmetic looks in pre-pre-algebra
x+4=7			This is how arithmetic looks in pre-algebra
x+4=y			This is how arithmetic looks in algebra

1+3			This is what people think an equation is before my book
1+3 =?			This is what people think an equation is after my book. 

We use ? Because we are asking a question. “1+3” is merely stating “one plus three” when really we mean “What is one plus three?”. The word equation mean equals sign. An equation sign with a + is like a sentence without a period. People will understand you, it's just really lazy and bad syntax. 

x+1			Without an equals sign a sum  is a number or an expression.
x+1=			We need and equals sign to classify it as an equation. 
x+1=y			We need something after the = and y works for our purposes.
x+1=y			This represents an arithmetic problem but is much more. 

If x is:
x=0			1st equation
x=1			2nd equation
x=2			3rd equation
x=∞			∞th equation	this proves fact #5■

Skeptics say, “But you are just adding 1 to a number, that is not very difficult”. Do you want difficult?
“–3+4√tanx(x2+6x/x3 –2x+3) ” you will never solve this. It does not have to be hard to be true. 

If x is: the domain of all real numbers (–∞,∞) we could spend a lifetime and still not solve a tiny fraction of all possible equation. The number of problems would exceed 960 trillion. All in one function.
We start by inputting 1 then continue with 1,2,3,4,5...∞.
Any function has infinite inputs with infinite outputs representing infinite equations.
Any function is simple arithmetic set to y to create endless equations that are plotted as a graph. 

We went from analyzing a single problem and its answer to analyzing graphs containing infinite answers to search for patterns. That's the difference between macro and micro. We use this to spot market and social trends to better ourselves and society. When the data gets to big we incorporate big data machine learning. We use A.I. To process data and python to automate routine tasks that are tedious to do by hand so we have more free time. 

When it is was 3+4 = 7 we got a single answer and moved on. When it was x+1 we called it a binomial that could not be simplified any further and moved on. When we took our binomial x+1 and set it equal to y then we had a breakthrough in math. We approached infinity and beyond. We created a linear function.  			
Memorize this entire list especially the squares and their roots
How many equations do you think are on this chart? This is a grid of 24 by 24 so it have an area of 576 square units. In a table we call these cells. Each cell has a solution that corresponds to a problem. 576 cells means 576 equations. How many equations do you think there are? Every multiplication problem has an inverse called division. That means 576 multiplication problems and 576 division problems. How many problems do you think are in this grid? There are patterns and series and addition... this would take a masters degree to solve and prove using formal logic. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
42
45
48
51
54
57
60
63
66
69
72
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
52
56
60
64
68
72
76
80
84
88
94
98
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
6
12
18
24
30
36
42
48
54
60
66
72
78
84
90
96
102
108
114
120
126
132
138
144
7
14
21
28
35
42
49
56
63
70
77
84
91
98
105
112
119
126
133
140
147
154
161
168
8
16
24
32
40
48
56
64
72
80
88
96
104
112
120
128
136
144
152
160
168
176
184
192
9
18
27
36
45
54
63
72
81
90
99
108
117
126
135
144
153
162
171
180
189
198
205
214
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
11
22
33
44
55
66
77
88
99
110
121
132
143
154
165
176
187
198
209
220
231
242
253
264
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
96
108
120
132
144
156
168
180
192
204
216
228
240
252
264
276
288
13
26
39
52
65
78
91
104
117
130
143
156
169
182
195
208
221
234
247
260
273
286
299
312
14
28
42
56
70
84
98
112
126
140
154
168
182
196
210
224
238
252
266
280
294
308
322
336
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
135
150
165
180
195
210
225
240
255
270
285
300
315
330
345
360
16
32
48
64
80
96
112
128
144
160
176
192
208
224
240
256
272
288
304
320
336
352
368
384
17
34
51
68
85
102
119
136
153
170
187
204
221
238
255
272
289
306
323
340
357
374
391
408
18
36
54
72
90
108
126
144
162
180
198
216
234
252
270
288
306
324
342
360
378
396
414
432
19
38
57
76
95
114
133
152
171
190
209
228
247
266
285
304
323
342
361
380
399
414
437
456
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
420
437
460
480
21
42
63
84
105
126
147
168
189
210
231
252
273
294
315
336
357
378
399
420
441
462
483
504
22
44
66
88
110
132
154
176
198
220
242
264
286
308
330
352
374
396
418
440
462
484
506
528
23
46
69
92
115
138
161
184
205
230
253
276
299
322
345
368
391
414
437
460
483
506
529
552
24
48
72
96
120
144
168
192
214
240
264
288
312
336
360
384
408
432
456
480
504
528
552
576

Lets limit it to just multiplying and eliminate duplicate problems. We have 572/2 or 288 unique problems.
Studying this chart helps us recognize patterns. There are patterns in the diagonals. Making this chart would be easy and done in a few minutes. Complete 288 problems and just copy the results to fill in the other 288 squares.
576 problem is a lot and it can be done in a short amount of time by seeing patterns and working efficiently. 
There is at least 2000 problems in here. I didn't multiply when I made this. I added, subtracted, noticed patterns, and used checksums. 

What patterns do you see? If all you see is solve in a box and ignore whats around it you are missing the point. We graph to see the big picture and compare how one answer is similar to another. We rarely are interested in a single answer as demonstrated in textbooks.  


Linear equations graph every answer to any x you can input creating endless answers that go on forever. In geometry a line never ends and neither do functions. We do not want to be overwhelmed by that much data so we limit our view to areas that interest us. It shows a lot of data at once and we try to manipulate that data for worldly gain.

A function is going to use a combination of operation to solve for y.
An inverse is going to take any y and work backwards to solve for x.

f(x) = x2		not invertable but used as a lesson~ the function take the input and squares it
f-1(x2)= √x12		the inverse takes the square and roots it 

f(x) = 2x+3		function doubles a number then adds 3
f-1(x) = (x–3)/2		inverse first subtracts a 3 and then divides by 2

f(x)=x3+2				f(y)=y3+2				 	f-1(x)=∛(x3–2)
f(5)=53+2				f(y)=53+2					f-1(127)=∛(127–2)
f(5)=127 = y				f(y)=127 = x					f-1(127)=5

If f(x) =y then inverting makes f(y) = x. A function with a point (5,127) will have an inverse with a point (127,5).

In all examples the function performed simple arithmetic and the inverse reversed it. This is called “working backwards”. You have done this before I know you have. All functions are is learning new notation. That is all new math is, learning new symbols and ways of writing equations. That is why I spend the time to teach notation thoroughly. It is the point. You can already add but you can not write and speak in a mathematical manner. Notation teaches etiquette. We are not here to solve complicated equations we are here to understand notation and process. Without that you can not input into a calculator to solve the hard problems for you.  

I heard that a function was a machine that puts x's in and pops y's out. This is silly and not deep. It is a superficial explanation that leads to superficial understanding. A function is a series of arithmetic operations starting with a sum called “x” and ending with a total called “y”. Its inverse is the process of taking a total called “y” and working backwards using inverse operations to get the original sum called “x”.

1. all we are doing is arithmetic
2. all we are doing is working backwards

Sidenote: There are 6 operations and they are just different ways of adding

Addition: 5+5 = 10				I added two sums
Subtraction: 10+(–5)   				I added a negative
Multiplication: 3∙5 = 5+5+5 = 15		I added three groups of five	
Division: 15/3 = 15+(–5)+(–5)=5		I added two negatives
Power: 32 = 3+3+3				I added three groups of three 
root:  √9  = 9+(–3)+(–3)			I added two negatives

All six operations are adding. We use the operations are shorthand code for performing addition faster. It saves space, ink, time, paper and trees and we care about the environment because we are conscientious citizens.
Math is not even hard you were just taught wrong or didn't listen. Anybody can do math it just takes effort.







Recap:

Algebra is Arabic for “the arithmetic”. We are just doing normal operations using complicated notation.
Without notation we are doing 4th grade math.

The difference between “3+4= ” and “x =3+4” is non existent. Solving for a variable is the same as solving for a blank space after an equals sign.  x represents that blank space. They could have taught that to 4th graders.

It is impossible to solve an equation with two unknowns. x=y or 2x =y requires substitution. We have to eliminate one variable so that the remaining variable is just a representation of the blank space from 4th grade. The way to do that is with function notation.

A function can be graphed using x and y as values for an ordered pair. 
A function is just a 4th grade math problem written with variables and clever notation.
A 4th grade math problem has working forwards and then working backwards to check your work.
A 4th grade math problem requires inverse operations to work backwards.
A function works forwards and then works backs to check its work. 
Working backwards in Algebra is called an inverse function.
Public school is run by satanic teachers that write deceptive and purposely misleading books so that you fail.
That is why things are confusing it is by design. 
Learn math on your own and do not trust anybody. They do not care about you. 
Nobody will love you as much as I do. All this love I give. Telling the truth is love telling lies is the opposite.
I will never lie to you because I care about your personal and professional development as a person.

The function y =x is called the identity function. We compare it to other graphs and look for symmetry.
Linear equations have inverse that are reflected across this line showing symmetry like a mirror image.
 
Inverse of a line
The inverse of a linear function is found by taking the negative reciprocal of slope. 
This rotates a line 90°. Where a linear function and its inverse function cross makes a ∠90°

Slope is M = y2 –y1/x2 – x1 which simplifies to M = y/x.
Reciprocal means opposite or inverse depending on context.

A number has two types of inverses 
1. Additive Inverse:  The opposite sign numbers added together. “The sum total of n and –n equals zero”.
5+(–5) = 0 also –5+5 = 0. The additive inverse of 5 is –5. –5 and 5 are additive inverses of each other.
   
2. Multiplicative Inverse. Two numbers that multiply to 1. For any x “The product of a x and 1/x equals 1”. 
We call this the reciprocal of a number. The reciprocal of 5 is 1/5.  The reciprocal of 1/5 is 5.

In general when we refer to the reciprocal we mean the multiplicative inverse. 
This is found by dividing 1 by your starting number:

1. 5		find the reciprocal
1÷5 = ⅕ 

2. ⅕		find the reciprocal
1÷⅕ = 5			

3. ⅖		find the reciprocal
1÷⅖ = 2.5 

4. 3.5		find the reciprocal
1÷3.5= 2/7	

Mechanics of reciprocals	 
1. Any number, whole or decimal, has a 1 as a denominator. For any number x, x = x/1.
2. Any number divided by 1 is itself. Changing order of division creates a reciprocal.
3. x÷1 = x so changing the order 1/x = 1/x. Reciprocals are reduced to dividing a number by itself.
4. (x÷1)(1÷x) = (x÷x) = 1 This simply restates reciprocal exponent laws on page 32 and elsewhere.


We need to find inverse by taking the negative reciprocal of slope. M = y/x so –1/M = –x/y. 
This exchanges the numerator and denominator with each other then multiplies it by –1 to make it negative.

1. M = y/x		Find reciprocal
2. 1÷(y/x)			The numerator is 1, the denominator is (y/x). This is a complex fraction.
3. 1∙(x/y)			When dividing by a fraction invert the fraction and then multiply
4. x/y 			The reciprocal of y/x is x/y because y/x ∙x/y = xy/xy = 1 

5. M-1 = 1/M		Find the negative of M-1 
6. –1/M

7. The reciprocal of M is 1/M because M∙1/M= 1
8. The “negative of” means it has a “ –“ in front




y = x				Find the inverse to this linear equation
y = –x				the slope is 1, the reciprocal of 1 is  1/1 =1, the negative of 1 is –1 

y =    2x+1			Find the inverse to this linear equation
y = –½x+1			the negative reciprocal of 2 is – ½

y = ⅔x –4			Find the inverse to this linear equation 
y = –1.5x –4 			the negative reciprocal of 2/3 is – 3/2

y = –¼x +2		            Find the inverse to this linear equation
y = 4x+2			the negative reciprocal of 2 is – ½  

We are using the y intercept form. When graphing close to the y axis we use this form.
A function and its inverse have the same y intercept. We only alter the slope variable “M” and leave the vertical rise variable “b” alone. 

A reciprocal has a formula and notation. This is useful for complicated functions involving messy equations.
A reciprocal uses “1 over” notation which is a negative 1 exponent, “-1”. A number = x, its reciprocal = x-1. 
Raising something to the power of –1 makes a number turn into its reciprocal:  x-1
Raising something to the power of –1 is the same as dividing 1 by that number: 1/x
Raising something to the power of –1 is the same as dividing that number by its square: x/x2
Finding the inverse for a quadratic function and failing
			
  Identity line f(x) = x					f(x)= (5/3)x+5					f(x)= (½)x–2 
–Identity line g(x) = –x 				g(x)= –⅗x+5					g(x)= –2x–2  

The identity line is its own inverse but we can create a line 90° perpendicular to it by multiplying slope by –1.
We could call this the identity line inverse and understand from context the meaning.
Two more line graphs showing the functions in blue and inverse functions in red.

Now that we have the inverse function of a line we could use point slope formula to find equation of a line using one point and slope. The purpose of this is to create a 90° tangent line that passes another function at an arbitrary spot. Using the point of the targeted spot and the slope for an inverse at that point you can create a tangent line anywhere. The trick is using point slope to find y-int because the y intercept formula will not work. 
Finding the inverse for a cubic function

For a function to have an inverse it must pass the horizontal test. We know that all quadratics fail. 
We also know that all cubics with a negative x term or any ±x2 term will fail. 
A cubic does have an inverse if It is Ax3±d, or Ax3 + Cx±d. A Bx2 or –Cx term will create two infliction points which a horizontal line will pass the graph at three points. This is a proven conjecture but you can prove it yourself. Get a graphing calculator and graph:

Ax3+Bx2+Cx+D 	Ax3+Bx2 –Cx+D	Ax3–Bx2–Cx+D	Ax3–Bx2–Cx–D
Ax3+Bx2+Cx –D	Ax3+Bx2–Cx –D	Ax3–Bx2–Cx+D	

There is no need to try –A because that just flips graphs vertically. 

3x3 – 6x+4			not invertable because it has –x term 
–2x3 +6x+4			invertable because x term is positive
3x3 – 9x2–7			not invertable because it has x2 term
3x3 – 6x+4			 not invertable because it has –x term
x3 				invertable because there in no x2 or –x

As long as the cubic does not contain x2 or –x terms it is invertable. Try for yourself so you familiarize yourself with cubics. This will help you moving forward. Learn to recognize the shape, inflection pattern, and how adjusting values and polarity transforms waviness. Precalculus deals heavily with modulating sine waves while calculus has Fourier transforms.  A Fourier transform is a infinite series comprised of sine waves that can talk any shape even draw images like blueprints or cartoons. So learning about cubics now and how to transform them is a smart idea. Takes about ten minutes.

The inverse of a cubic will reflect it across the identity line (y=x). Reflection is a geometry concept studied after algebra that gives precise language to what is happening on a graph while transformations and other activity is happening.  A reflection happens over some line the identity line or the x or y axis.  When reflected it performs a complex rotation. A complex rotation is a rotate and flip move.

90° rotation about the origin 		translation using a directional slide			  complex rotation “flip”
												  reflection about x axis	

A transformation is when points on a graph change locations thus altering the graph visually and numerically.
Basic geometric transforms are rotate, slide, and flip. Rotate and slide are 2-dimensional moves only needing two axis of movement but a flip is three dimensional needing to cross over an imaginary plane. For our intents we can call the third dimension z and treat it like any normal 3d space. Imagine letter magnets on a fridge. I can rotate them or slide them without them leaving their plane of existence. 

If however I invert them by flipping them upside down so that front and back swap you will see the magnet on the back of letter facing you. You would need a strong magnet to overcome plastic insulation to hold letter to fridge. The letter is upside down while magnet is visible from the front.  For this to occur I would need to physically remove magnet and flip it and then place it back on the surface of fridge. Flipping through space like that requires the use of a 3 axis system while the previous two types need only a 2 axis system.

Finding the inverse for any function

1. Create a function and write the equation for it.
2. Make sure it passes both vertical and horizontal line tests.
3. Plot points and make a table or list of known points.
4. Now create the inverse function by erasing all x and replacing with all y. Change original y to x.
5. Graph and check points. Every y should map the every x. Every x should map to every y.
6. The domain and range of the original should be inverted for the inverse.
7. If you have a point like (2,0) then it's inverse should have a point (0,2)
8. If you fail to be able to check a point like this then your inverse function is not an inverse of the original.
9. Inverting x and y values was covered on page 79, cubics was covered last page.

Function 
function-1
F(x) = y
F(y) = y
x=y
y=x
2x = y
x = 2y
x3
y3
x3+13
y3+13
√x
√y
3√x
3√y
2x3+7x –2  
2y3+7y–2 
Use all x
Use all y

All inverses are reflected over the line y=x. y=x is a special case where it and its inverse share the same equation so they have infinite solutions. A solution is a shared ordered pair. A cubic, linear, and posinomial( square root) and there inverses for your pleasure. 


Operations & Compositions

A composition is a function in a function:
1. A compound operator is ± where x = ±5 is the solution to 25 because –52 = 25 and 52 = 25.  
2. A compound operation is when skipping steps during simplifying: (2+3∙3)2 +1= 122.
3. A function is a compound operation where many steps are done: f(x) = (2x+2)/3   so f(5) = 4.
4. A composition is a compound function where a function is used as an input in other function.

There are four formulas for compositions:
1. (f+g)(x) = f(x)+g(x)		this is notation for addition of two functions and not distribution.
2. (f–g)(x) = f(x)–g(x)		this is notation for subtraction of two functions and not distribution.
3. (fg )(x) = f(x)g(x)		this is notation for multiplication of two functions and not distribution.
4. (f/g)(x) = f(x)/g(x)		this is notation for division of two functions and not distribution.

The reason it is not distribution is because of how the notation is pronounced, and how f and g are not variables but shorthand notes. (f± or ∙/g)(x) is spoken as “(1st function plus/minus or times/divided 2nd function)” I put all four operators in one sentence because I did not want to write four rules, one for each operation.
(f+g)(x) is the sum of two functions: Let f(x) = ⅔x –12 and g(x) = 7/2x+2.3.

(f+g)(x) = y 							find the sum of f(x) and g(x)
x = 0		f(0) = ⅔x –12 and g(0) = 7/2x+2.3		
		–12+2.3
		–10.7 = y
		(0, – 10.7)	

x = – 2 	f(–2) = (⅔)(–2) –12 + g(–2) = (7/2)(–2)+2.3
			–4/3 –12     +	           –14/2+2.3
			 –1.3–7 –9.7   				 
			–17.7 –⅓
			–17 –7/10 –⅓    
			–17 –21/30 –10/30			–21/30 –10/30 is (–21/30 –10/30) or  –1(21/30 +10/30)	
			–17 –31/30
			–18.03 	=y   (–2,–18.03)		

x = 3		f(3) = ⅔(3) –12 and g(3) = 7/2x+2.3
			2+12.8 = 14.8				point is (3,14.8)
			
(f–g)(3) =y	f(3) = ⅔(3) –12 and g(3) = 7/2(3)+2.3		find the difference of f(x) and g(x)
		1 – 12 – (10.5+2.3)				– (10.5+2.3) is –1(12.8) is –12.8  
		–13–10.5–2.3  
		–25.8 = y					point is (3, –25.8) 

(fg)(4) =y	f(4) = ⅔(4) –12 and g(4) = 7/2(4)+2.3		find the product of f(x) and g(x)
		(8/3 –12)(14+2.3)
		152.4 = y 					point (4,152.4)				
				
(f/g)(8)=y	f(8) = ⅔(8) –12 and g(8) = 7/2(8)+2.3		find quotient of f(x) and g(x)				
		(16/3 –12)/(28) 
		( –20/3)/28
		–20/(3∙28)
		–20/(84) =   (–1/4.2)=   (–10/42)=   –5/21		point is (8, – 5/21)
Slope is usually fractional so you have to work efficiently with fractions.
I made those slightly hard to prepare for compositions which are harder.
Remember that a function = y and y can equal a polynomial. 
That means you can perform (+,–,∙,÷,^,√) on two or more polynomials. Technically we did last page.

If f(x) = 4√x and g(x) = 2x then what is f(x)/g(x) when x = 9?

f(9)/g(9)
4√9/2∙9		                 √9 = 3 so 4∙3/2∙9  = 12/18 if  finding products first or 2∙3/9 if canceling 2 in the denominator
12/18 or 6/9	           
y = ⅔		        

 There are many ways to solve this because multiplication is commutative with division; This means we do not need () for numerator or denominator. Any order of multiplying or dividing would work:
4√9/2∙9 becomes (4∙3)/(2∙9) which = (2∙3)/9 if canceling two first or 12/18 if taking product first.
If 6/9 reduce by factoring out 3 = ⅔
If 12/18 reduce by factoring out 6 = ⅔

Pemdas does not care which order multiplication and division is performed since they are inverses
It doesn't care if in –2+4 –1+5 what order you add or subtract because they are inverses.
These are written in the inverses laws in the properties of equality in beginning of book. 
It's what the formulas are trying to say. You need to know the law associated with what trick you are doing so you can refer to it by name. You need examples of the trick in action so you can see its power. 
The law is what gives you the right to perform the trick in the first place otherwise your actions are not justified.

I do not have space to not show all the ways to manipulate the expression. Different people will use different rewriting of the expression. Algebra is the method of restating our sums. The laws say when and how you are allowed to altered an equation and keep it balanced. There are simple ways and hard ways.
The questions that come up are,” why am I allowed to do this?” “why does this work? When does this work?”, “can I do this in this situation? What if number is this or operation is that?”
You need to understand the laws, justify your decisions, and state your answers with confidence.  
Knowing the laws builds confidence.

Note that Pemdas does not care whether you add or subtract first because subtract is really adding a negative, you are just separately negative terms with + sign: 4 –5 –6 –7+2 = 4+(–5)+(–6)+(–7)+2. Since it is just adding the order doesn't not matter so when we say work left to right it is to keep track of your terms note because there is a law saying that you have to. Association lets you reorder anyways.

Likewise Pemdas doesn't care the order of 4∙3/2∙9 because 4÷2∙3÷9 = 4/2 ∙3/9 = 2∙⅓. There are a lot of funny changes that you can do but they seem more complicated. This complicated ways helps with harder problems that can not be solved simply. Practicing algebraic manipulation is to turn the ugly equations into more recognizable forms. Note  ⅑-0.5 = 3  because √⅑ = ⅓ and ⅓-1 =3  not the way to solve but you could.
Also 4/2 ∙3/9 = 4/9 ∙3/2 = ⅔. It really shows that inverse operations are commutative.


You can operate on a function. If f(x) = y then 3f(x) = 3y. We take our output and then multiply by 3. 
This is used later for logs and derivatives using the log principal. I do not want to do that now because it is a silly way to introduce calculus.  I will explain the notation and then move on.

(f + 2g–h)(–2) is three functions being summed. They want you to sum “f(x) plus 2∙g(x) –h(x)” using x = –2. 

This is a sum of functions that are being transformed. A transformation is when you perform operations on a function. This alters outputs and changes shape of graph. If you had a geometric shape it would shift, rotate or get stretched...this is called geometric transformations. If you had a linear function you would alter the slope or vertical shift. This is called amplitude and shift. Quadratics allows the coefficients a,b,c to alter amplitude,horizontal shift, and vertical shift. Cubics have amplitude, horizontal and vertical shift as well but use Ax3 and Bx2 for amplitude whereas a quadratic only uses Ax2 for amplitude. The largest term has the greatest effect on shape so it makes sense higher powers affect amplitude, or the “power” of the graph. Later in precalculus and trigonometry phase shift is used to describe horizontal shift from sine to cosine. This applies electricity that treats a 1 dimensional electromagnetic as having a four dimensional axis system. So this is all very important and worthwhile topics to study. Unless you are just interested in painting houses and want to use polynomials to optimize project cost estimation.

(f+2g–h)(–2)		Solve yourself using three functions f(x), g(x), and h(x) use x = –2
			Each function has x = –2 as an input but different y.
  
f(x) = y1		This is like saying output1
g(x) =y2 		This is like saying output2  
h(x) =y3		This is like saying output3  

f(x) + 2g(x) – h(x)	This is like saying (output1 +2∙output2 – output3) 
y1+ 2y2 –y3		Subscripts indicate three different “y”.  

f(x) + 2g(x) – h(x)	if f(x) = 2x–1 g(x) = 2x+1 and h(x) = x2+5x+6

(f+2g–h)(–2)
f(–2) + 2g(–2) – h(–2)

()+2()+()						put your function inside (), + signs to separate 
(2x–1)+	2(2x+1)+	(x2+5x+6)		
(2(–2) –1) + 2((2(–2)+1)) + ((–2)2 +5(–2)+6)		this can be done mentally but writing is okay
(–5)+(–6)+(0) = –11

–4–1+2(–4+1)+(4–10+6)				how I did it mentally. It's just a string of simple stuff.  
–5 +2(–3)+(0)						the quadratic cancels. Important to see. 

The quadratic cancels but would not if it had A ≠1. Monics are easy so for better practice in other things they will have an amplification of greater than 1 making them non-monic.


Showing operations is to work up to doing compositions. The formulas pretty much speak for themselves and are easy to follow. We should move on to actual compositions. In dividing polynomial we can do division of functions. A function is a ratio of x to y but that usually boils down to just a function being an ordinary arithmetic problem unless we have a special case where x is defined for some quantity. Then we do not have a function but a constant and a constant is not a function nor ratio nor a 2d ordered pair to be plotted. It is a zero dimension dot on an x axis. Proof is given at end of book proofs. 
Compositions
Composition is when you substitute a function for x. Instead of plugging in a number for x you plug in an entire equation. Refer to page 44 where j was substituted with 2x–1: 

(x+2)(x+3)			we need to write x+2 as a variable use x+2 = j
(j)(x+3)			substitute j for x+2 (yes you can use a variable for a sum or even entire equation)		
jx+3j				distribute (j)(x+3) into jx+3j
(x+2)(x) + (3)(x+2)		input x+2 back for j
x2+2x+3x+6			
x2+5x+6			this is a quadratic in standard form “Ax2+Bx+C”  because x has power 2

Here we used a to represent a binomial:

a = x+2			     			or					a = x–4
												
(x+2)(x–4)											(x –4)(x+2)		
a(x–4)			this looks like a(b+c)							a(x+2)
a(x)+a(–4)		setup like ()+() to look like (ab)+(ac)					a(x) + a(2)
ax –4a 			this look like (ab)+(ac)							ax+2a
()x – 4()		take common factor “a” out create ()b +()c				()x + 2()
x(x+2)+ –4(x+2)	move x to the front so it this looks like a(b+c) + a(b+c)		x(x–4)+ 2(x–4)	
x2 +2x –4x –8				both are the same					x2 –4x +2x –8 	
x2  –2x –8 											x2 –2x –8 
		
Kids can this “FOIL”, books call this “two binomial multiplication”, eggheads call this “the sum of two products” 
You can change the order because foil is simply distribution twice. This makes is commutative so order does not matter. Compositions are not commutative so order does matter. When writing a composition we always use the  order we are operating for function notation. ab+ac = ba+ ca but f(g(x)) ≠ g(f(x)) unless they are commutative. This will be shown.

f(x)  = x+2 			heavy use of color coding... blue x equals the entire red function
g(x) = x –4			x = g(x)	x= an undefined constant which will be defined later 

f(g(x)) =  x +2			Substitute a function called “g(x)” for the x in f(x) making x become g(x).  
f(g(x)) = (x) +2			I put () to indicate that x is a different x than “x–4”			  
f(g(x)) = (g(x)) +2		Substitute a function called “g(x)” for x.  (x) = (g(x))
f(g(x)) = (x –4)+2		Substituted x –4 for x. We put a function in a function.
f(g(x)) = x –2			x–4+2 = x–2  

When I said “Substitute a function called “g(x)” for x in f(x) making x become g(x)”  We have a function called f(x) and we need to input a value for x, we use another function called g(x) for the input. We input g(x), the whole thing, inside f(). 	f(x)→ f() needs an input→ f(  g(x)    )  use g(x) for input. 

f(g(x)) = 2x –8 is spoken as “The composition f(g(x)) = 2x – 8”.
The composition f(g(x)) is spoken as “ f of g of x” meaning “the function f of function g of x”
These are hard to read and pronounce so we teach language so you do not sound funny.

g(f(x)) = x –4  		
g(f(x)) = (x+2) –4  		x becomes x+2
g(f(x)) = x–2			x–2 = x–2  reflexive	f(g(x)) = g(f(x)) 
			
Here both compositions are commutative only because it is an example from foil. This is a special case.
Most of the time compositions are not commutative. 

f(x)= 2x–3 
g(x) = x+7

f(g(x)) = 2x–3 
f(g(x)) = 2(x+7)–3		x = x+7 these are two different x meaning two different inputs 
f(g(x)) = (2x+14)–3		distribute 2 into (x+7)
 f(g(x)) = 2x+14 –3		remove () and combine constants
f(g(x)) =  2x+11		done

g(f(x)) = x+7
g(f(x)) = (2x –3) +7		x input = 2x –3 
g(f(x)) = 2x +4			done

2x+11 ≠ 2x –4 so they are not commutative. 
We can say f of g(x) but also “f circle g” written “f ∘ g”.
Instead of f(g(x) we write “f ∘ g” because it is easier to read.  

Notation uses () and they are ugly and messy but without them the equation gets uglier and messier. The () keeps things in order. Beginners do not want to use () but they are needed. Without them the order gets confused and is illegible. Using () is called nesting. Using double or triple () is called nesting () inside ().

Beginning on page 88 I relied heavily on color coding to show what is being nested where.
A composition is a function in a function, so we need two sets of (). Using one set is a mistake and wrong.
It will have two different inputs. We have a function as an input and the function has its own input.

sin(x) = y			what if input is tan(x)?
sin(tan(x)) = y			whole thing gets put in black ()

You should not need more than two sets of (). Three sets of () is pushing it. After three sets brackets [] are used.
If you need to write three () inside [] try rewriting your equation. The only time that many grouping symbols are used is for fully exploring a function to pick it apart to learn what is going on, how the operations work, and what laws of equality we can apply. It is to research new methods similar how I showed alternatives to foil. 
It is not for solving but for teaching.

We use two sets of () commonly. After that we invent new notation so we do not have very long groups of ().
F circle g means the same thing as f(g(x). Circle notation looks nicer, () notation shows exactly what goes where. You should be comfortable with both and use each as is appropriate for the current situation. That many () shows whats going on but looks confusing, circle notation looks simple but doesn't show anything. It may be too simple.  

Simple is when we do not have an explanation and just throw formulas at people. 
Complicated is when we teach process with lengthy lectures.
Having a full understanding is called foundation.

f(x) is our first function. It requires and input called x.
We use the second function called g(x).  


f(x)  = x+2 			heavy use of color coding... blue x equals the entire red function
g(x) = x –4			x = g(x)	x= an undefined constant which will be defined later

f(  x  ) = x+2	→f(  input  )= input+2	→f( g(x) ) = g(x)+2	→f(  x–4  ) = (x–4)+2

f(x) takes an input and adds 2.
Our input is g(x).
Our composition is the function f(x) where x = g(x) as an input 
Our composition is f(  g(x)  )	uses g(x) as an input, there are other ways to write “g(x)”  we write it as (x–4) 

Our composition takes g(x) and adds 2.
Our composition takes (x–4) and adds 2.
g(x) is the same thing as x–2 because g(x) = (x–2). This is called an equivalence statement.  

Pronounce “equivalence statement”. This is how you have to talk. You are not allowed to “dumb it down”.
This is high level math. We use equivalence statements all the time and have to think  a certain way and comprehend things at a higher level than before. A basic math comprehension is not good enough. It is a starting point for little kids because they lack maturity nothing more. Someone who is mathematically mature will be mature in all parts of there life. Someone who isn't mathematically mature isn't mature in any part of their and are partially retarded. It's just the ugly truth that no one wants to admit because of powerful economic forces.

This isn't worrying about language for the sake of being a grammar Nazi. It is to be able to define in clear words any part of any operation. Simple explanations lack clarity and are not good enough. When vocabulary suffers so does comprehension and then common sense. It is a form of low iq.

An equivalence statement directly tells us we can substitute one side of the equation for the other, always.
Notation always puts inputs in parentheses. Inputs are always in (). Inputs with inputs have two ().
a math way of saying this is “n inputs have n ()” meaning the number of inputs equals the number of ().

y = Mx+b
y = (⅖)x +4			we inputted ⅖ for slope so it gets ()
f(x) =⅖x +4			hmm. It should have () but we are sloppy
f(5) =⅖(5) +4			we inputted 5 for x so it gets ()
f(5) =(⅖)(5) +4			seems silly to have two sets of () here so only use for last input (5) 

g(x) = 3.5x+2			slope is 3.5 or 7/2
f(g(x)) =  ⅖(3.5x+2)+4		g(x) is inputted into f() making f(g(x)).
f(g(x)) =  ⅖(3.5x+2)+4		3.5x+2 is inputted into ⅖()+4 making  ⅖(3.5x+2)+4


Inputs
We know that f(g(x)) =  ⅖(3.5x+2)+4	but we do not know what the input for g(x) is. A composition gives a function a different function as an input but we still need an input for the nested function.

f(g(x)(constant)	choose a constant...
f(g(x)(21)		you choose 21

f(g(21)) =  ⅖(3.5x+2)+4
f(g(21)) =  ⅖(3.5∙21+2)+4		type into calculator or solve longhand
f(g(21)) =  ⅖(3.5∙21+2)+4 = 34.2	algebra is to write all this messy stuff...calculator is to solve


f(g(21)) =  ⅖(3.5∙21+2)+4 = 34.2	algebra is to write all this messy stuff...calculator is to solve

The casio fx-991 class wiz was used to compute. Any similar calculator and do this ion one string.

Pronounce out loud “⅖(3.5∙21+2)+4 = 34.2”. 

Correct: Four plus two fifths of the quantity three point five times twenty-two plus two	= 34.2
Incorrect: two fifths of the quantity three point five times twenty-two plus two plus four  = 31.8
Because:  two fifths of the quantity “three point five times twenty-two plus six”                = 31.8  

The incorrect phrase places 4 inside the () as part of the quantity. It's wrong. This is tricky because we have to pronounce the +4 first to avoid adding 4 to 2 making it six. When stuck on what to do consult Pemdas:

⅖(3.5∙21+2)+4 = 34.2				Parentheses first
⅖(73.5+2)+4    = 34.2  				Multiply inside parentheses 
⅖(75.5)+4        = 34.2  				Add inside parentheses 
30.2+4             = 34.2  				Multiply 
34.2                 = 34.2	  			reflexive

The letter infront of a function is its name. We name functions using letter starting at f for function and then go f,g,h,i,k...we use this notation to label graphs when they are shown together. More than three graphs the data becomes cluttered unless we are graphing a family of functions like sine waves or geological or weather data.

We memorize tables of special values for later performing rough calculations in our heads. We use algebra to rewrite equations so that we can put them into calculators so we can get exact answers. We study language and pronunciation so that people understand us. Without understanding the language and notation you are doomed. We use calculators to solve but they have an esoteric mess of symbols and codes that uninitiated persons can not comprehend. Without understanding the language concepts are barely grasped and using a calculator or knowing what buttons to push becomes impossible. 

Functions and compositions perform simple arithmetic (4th grade math). We are not testing on whether you can do arithmetic, we are testing on whether you can read complicated code, input the correct order of operations, and then state your answer correctly. Remember (f∘g)(x) = f(g(x)) and consulate composition rules.

f(x)= 3x2–9 
g(x)=2x+3

(f+g)(x)= f(x)+g(x)				(f+g)(2) ≠2f+2g compositions do not distribute 
(f+g)(2)= 3(2)2–9 +2(2)+3			φ
(f+g)(2)=    12–9 +7
(f+g)(2)= 10					(2,10)

(f–g)(4)= 3(4)2–9 +2(4)+3			f(x) – g(x)
(f–g)(4)=    48–9 +11
(f–g)(4)= 50

(fg)(2)= (3(2)2–9) ∙ (2(2)+3)		f(x)g(x) or more clearly f(x) ∙ g(x) or uglier (f(x))(g(x))
(fg)(2)= (3) ∙ (7)
(fg)(2)= 21

(f/g)(x) will be covered in division of polynomials under rational expressions and work, rate, and mixture problems. Radicals will be covered under logarithmic functions.
Inverse operation on a Function
An inverse operation negates a previous function. Negation is a canceling of an operation. If we negate a function using inverse operations we are using an anti-function do to that. Inverse operations are:

1. Add→Subtract
2. Multiply→Divide
3. Power→Radical
4. Subtract→Add
5. Divide→Multiply
6. Radical→Power

A function is an equation. Equations can only do a series of the 6 operations above.
Past 8th grade these 6 operations should be mastered
Focus now is on language and notation to teach symbolism
Any easy examples have hard complicated multiple steps in real life
Easy examples are to teach notation and process not give an accurate idea of how they are actually used 
Real life problems are called applications and are shown in the back of the book citing earlier lessons

The word function means a style of writing an equation. These equations are simple arithmetic with complicated and hard to read symbolism. We teach notation so you can read the problem and know what is asking you to do. Since there are only six operators it can only ask you to do one of those six. The hardest parts of math is not solving operations but interpreting word problems from English into equations or reading symbolism and knowing what operation to perform when. If an equation looks hard you are probably unfamiliar with the notation. Its simple math with unknown notation. Learning notation is just learning new tricks on how to express yourself.

Define a number: A written symbol expressing a quantity that can be either negative or positive to be stated in many ways including numerals, variables, and any combination of the previous called mathematical expressions.

Define a mathematical expression: A single term or string of terms that denotes a numerical value yet is not a full equation as it is lacking an equation sign although we may use incorrect language and call or treat it as an equation for brevity and ease of use.

Define an equation: A math problem, but more precisely an expression containing an equals sign. Technically this implies that an equivalence between quantities is created making it a ratio between two sums. This further implies that all equations are functions notation notwithstanding.
  
Define a function: A ratio between the variables x and y written using f(x) notation. A function is an equation containing the variable x. Aside from notation, once we substitute for x, it is a basic equation containing one variable known as y which represents the result. All equations have an known for a result until they are solved so aside from notation it is identical in function to arithmetic. The listing of x and y as ordered pairs to be plotted is a matter of graphing not a matter of the definition of a function. 

Define an additive inverse: The opposite quality of a number expressed with use of value signs.
Define a reciprocal: The inverted form of a number that cancels under multiplication with it's co-factor. 

Define an inverse operation: An operation is said to be an inverse if it negates a previous one.
Define an anti-function: A function which negates a previous function.
Define an inverse function: f-1(f(x)) is an inverse function if f-1(f(x)) = x. Any function which cancels the first creating the function known as x = y or the identity line.

We talked about the inverse of a line and finding the inverse for any function on page 76.
We briefly talked about negative slope of a line going down instead of up.
An inverse operation is found by writing the steps used to turn the output into an matching input.
This page talks about anti-functions that give the same function but word backwards instead of forwards to solve.

f(x) = x+2				add 2
f(2) = 4					(2,4)		
f-1(4) =2				subtract 2, the inverted values are (4,2)

f(x)= 3√x +2				square root,multiply,add
f(4)= 8					(4,8)
f-1(8) = (8–2/3)2				(8,4) subtract,divide,square

All we did was work backwards using the inverse operations:

function: 	1st  square root, 	2nd  multiply,	 3rd  add 
function-1: 	1st  subtract, 		2nd  divide, 	3rd   power

f(x)= 2(2x3 –3)				Our function asks us to cube,multiply,subtract,multiply 
f(4)= 2(2(4)3 –3) 
f(4)= 2(2(64) –3) 
f(4)= 2(128 –3)
f(4)= 2(125)
f(4)= 250
f-1(250) = ∛(((250/2)+3)/2)		Our anti-function asks us to divide,add,divide,cubic root...
f-1(250) = ∛((125)+3)/2 		
f-1(250) = ∛(128/2) 			you can use ∛(128/2) or ∛128/2  but not ∛128/2 because it equals 2
f-1(250) = ∛64
f-1(250) = 4				(250,4)

Three () is pushing it try rewriting...radicals are grouping symbols when vinculum is extended.

f(x)= x8 ∙x8				we should write it as x16 but want to practice power laws
f(2)= 28∙28 				216
f(2)=256∙256				216
f(2)=65535				216
f-1(x16) = 16√x16				x16-15	write the original function in f-1() if you want
f-1(216) = 16√216				216-15 	anything to the power of 0 equals 1 so not 16–16 
f-1(65535) = 2				(216,2) powers of 2 or 5 or 10 are written in exponent notation

16√216 = 2 because the operation cancel each other but than does not mean 216-16 =2.
If 2∙2∙2=8 =23 then ∛23 = 2 because 2∙2∙2/2∙2 = 2 



Inverse operations cancel. Exponents cancel when root index and base index match...but not under addition only under multiplication. Canceling is either an additive inverse or a reciprocal, this is a reciprocal. 
2/2 =1 so we have 2∙2∙2/2∙2 = 2∙1∙1/1∙1 =2. This is the truth, we are reducing a fraction. Shortcuts obscure mechanics. For any root operation that cancels the number of remaining exponents is n–(n–1) =1. ∛8 =23-2=1
This is covered in radical laws. ∀ n√xn =xn–(n–1)=1 = x. 
Inverses cancel each other: x +3–3= x … x–2+2 = x … x∙10/10 = x … x/7∙7 = x … √x2 = x … (√x)2 = x   
For any trig function: f-1(f(x)) = x  and f(f-1(x)) = x.
The difference between an anti-function and inverse function.
Anti-functions are inverse operations in pure math.
Inverse functions are geometric rotations in graphing. 

1. Additive inverses add to 0 so they cancel under addition.
2. Multiplicative inverses called reciprocals multiply to 1 so they cancel under multiplication
3. Exponential inverses reduce to reciprocal cancellation.
4. logarithmic inverses reduce to reciprocal cancellation
5. trigonometric inverses reduce to reciprocal cancellation
6. Matrix inverses reduce to reciprocal cancellation. Matrices are polynomial or linear functions.

There are five types of functions and 2 types of ways they cancel. 

Trigonometric functions do not have inverse functions *in graphing*.
Sine does not have an inverse because it fails horizontal test.
If sin(x) = y then sin(y) = x
Sine of x is graphed in blue. A the x axis passes it ∞ many times.
Sine of y is rotated 90°. A vertical line passes it ∞ many times.
Sine of x is a function without an inverse. 
Sine of y is not a function but does have an inverse.
Both are reflected across the line f(x) = x which is x = y the identity function.

f(x) = 2x 	is a function and has an inverse because passes both tests.
f(y) = 2y	is a function and has an inverse because passes both tests.

Both are reflected across the line f(x) = x which is x = y the identity function.

Logarithmic functions have inverses:
f(x) = ln(x) 	is a function and has an inverse
f(y) = ln(y)	is a function and has an inverse

Both are reflected across the line f(x) = x which is x = y the identity function.
ln(x) = ex  so is similar to exponential graphs. This is because exponents and radicals are inverse operations of each other. Logs are inverted radicals.

f(x) = √x in blue	(power,root) is a function and has an inverse
f(y) = √y in red 	(root,power) is a function and has an inverse

These are the same type of function as logs except are limited to first quadrant


linear functions have inverses:
f(x) = 3x+2  	is a function and has an inverse because passes both tests.
f(y) = 3y+2	is a function and has an inverse because passes both tests.

Only certain types of cubics have inverses: Ax3 +0x2 +Cx±D.  
If A, B , or C <0 the cubic will create two infliction points causing a horizontal line to pass the graph at three points. 

A is amplitude and adjusting it causes graph to “accelerate” or “decelerate”.
B is horizontal shift and C is periodicity. Both create bumps if <0.
D  is vertical shift and does not affect shape only placement of y intercept.
The identity function gives a visual check to see if two functions are inverses of each other. 
This is because inverses functions are said to “reflect” across the identity function.

The first thought is that if the inverses cancel then they multiply to 1 creating a 1:1 ratio that is x =y.
If this happen x will be as strong as y as they are equally balanced, neither x nor y has a greater rate of acceleration. The second thought is if they are inverses they have the same symmetry about the identity function. For two functions that are inverses of each other they share inverted x and y values for every point on their curve. This will create symmetry that can be seen and measured. Any point shall be called P and any reflection of this point shall be called P' or P1. P' is called “p prime” and P1 is called “p one” or “p sub one”.

Inverse functions are used to cancel functions in an equation. Canceling a function removes operations.
This is useful in composing calculus functions and eliminating functions to find an x value. 
You have a curve and need a point with a set height that you determine. You locate the point that fits criteria for y value but the x value of that point is fractional or irrational and hard to determine. You need an exact value so need to start at an output called y and eliminate functions to find an initial x input. An inverse function cancels the function that created y so that you are left with the x that was used to create it. An x value can be thought of as a seed value that grows into a y value. This is graph flipping.

The “inverse of a function”; is stating a very generic scenario and uses the word inverse as part of a phrasing; 
is simply pure math not involving graphing where we solve for a missing number that sums to a known total. If total is known we only have one unknown which is the missing “x” and that x is found using an inverse of a function. This is solving for x like x+3=y x = 4. The process we used involved inverse operations, that were a function, that worked inversely backwards. The “inverse of a function “ we will call an anti-function to avoid confusion. Do not worry about it.

Inverse means two different things just as “tan-1(x)” and “tan(x)-1 = 1/tan(x)” mean two different things but both use inverse notation. Of course this is confusing. The people who invented notation were bad at communication and simplified things to a point where the same words were used for different meanings.

We will do math and move on to polynomial division and worry about notation and syntax later.
But first:

The “inverse of a function” and an “Inverse Function” are different. The key difference is the use of “ of a”. The former is generic function while the latter implies a specific function relating to the identity function.
We will use the made up word “anti-function” to avoid confusion. Therefore from now on an inverse flips a graph and an  anti-function is any process that words backwards.

Inverse: flip a graph
anti-function: solve for x. 

Identity: f(x) =y		usually will be colored black
function: (g)x = function 	usually will be colored blue, then any second graph will be red inverse or not  
Inverse of g(x): g(y) = x	will always be the second graph and red if available.
Inverse of g(x): g-1(g(x) = x	this is standard notation and confusing to some.  

Inverse of g(x): g-1(g(x) = x	g-1(g[input y to solve for x]) this is standard notation. Brackets means “input”
Inverse of g(x): g-1(g(x) = 	this will be the same steps as g(x) except we input the output and output the input.

g(x) = 3x+2			Follow the x like a logic circuit. This is actually what is happening	
g(3) = 11				   3(3)+2 = 11 = y
g-1(g(x) = ((3x+2)–2÷3) = x		   (3x+2) = 11 = y
g-1(11)  = (g(3)   –2)÷3  = 3  		      3               = x
We are given the equation –13= 6∛x –3 +5 . To solve for x we have to work backwards starting from the last operation and working towards the first. Identify how many operations have to be done and in what order.

If y = –13 how did this happen? An input was put in for x so start at x and trace its steps to y then work backwards from y to get back to x.

1. Find x
2. track 1st operation to last
3. find y
4. invert every operation to go from y back to x
5. write an inverse operation using either g-1(x) or h(y) notation and solve
6. back substitute to check answers

1. g(x) = 	6∙∛x –3 +5 	= –13 			this is g(x) = y    to solve for y			
2. g(y)= (y–5/6)3+3		= –24			this is g(y) =x     to solve for x (working backwards)
3. g-1(6∙∛x–3 +5)	   	= (x–5/6)3+3
4. 		
				
Side by side comparison between g-1(x) and h(y) of notation
g-1(x)
Steps for g-1(x)
h(y)
Steps for h(y)
g-1(x)= 6∙∛x–3 +5	= x	
start
h(y)= (y–5/6)3+3
start
g-1(–13)= 6∙∛x–3 +5	= –13	
start
h(–13)= (-13–5/6)3+3
start
               6∙∛x–3   	= –18 
Subtracted 5
             (-18/6)3    +3
Subtracted 5 
                  ∛x–3    	= –3	
Divided by 6
             (-3)3       +3
Divided by 6
                  x –3   	= –33 
cubed
            – 27+3
Cubed
                  x	   	= –33 +3
Added 3
            – 24
Added 3
g-1(–13)=    x	   	= –24 
simplified


I prefer f(y) notation. Notice I used g(y) =x and f-1(y) = x. It is much much less confusing this way. Other ways have you confusing x with y by saying g(x) = x or some other silly nonsense. This is if you have an output to a function and need to find it's x. This is not an inverse function it is an inverse operation on a normal function. Both inverse operation are identical they just differ in how they are written. They are the same graphically.
Rewriting an equation 		Solve for x:  – 13 = 6∛x –3 + 5

1.	          y =  6∛x –3 + 5	                y =  6∛x –3 + 5	      ((y–5)/6)3 +3 = x	                       x = ((y–5)/6)3 + 3 
2.	     y –5 = 6∛(x – 3)		– 13 =  6∛x –3 + 5 	(( – 13–5)/6)3 +3 = x		      x –3 = ((y –5)/6))3
3.        (y – 5)/6 =  ∛(x–3)		 –18 = 6∛(x – 3)	         (( – 18)/6)3 = x–3	    ∛x –3 = (y –5)/6) 
4.       ((y–5)/6)3 =     x–3		  –3  = ∛(x–3)		                  (–3)3 = ∛(x–3)	  6∛x –3 = (y –5)	   
5.   ((y–5)/6)3 +3 =    x			–27 = x–3			        –27 = x–3  	  6∛x –3 +5 = y
6.					– 24 = x				           24 = x
First column shows generalized formula for solving this equation. This is called written in terms of x.  Ordered pair found is (x,y)
Second column shows how it would actually be solved by substituting known output for y.                   Ordered pair found is (–24, –13)
Third column shows steps from 1st column written in reverse then solves. This is written in terms of y. Ordered pair found is (–24, –13)
Fourth column is extra, it shows the generalized form of the third column, it is the same as first column but reverse order.

I want to say that this are both the same equation for a function but written in either terms of x and y not to be confused with a different equation called inverse function. While this is written in an inverted style it is still the same function. If I want an inverse function I have to change the location of x and y and perform the same operations in the same order not leave them in the same location and perform inverse operations working backwards. For the inverse of this operation: y =  6∛x –3 + 5 becomes x =  6∛y –3 + 5. That is it.


To graph these equations first I start with the identity function f(x) = y. Then I name the two matching equations g(x) and h(y) to show which equations have which terms. Then I name the inverse function i(x). Finally I graph the four function. The two functions g(x) and h(y) will overlap at every point proving congruence. The inverse will be reflected over the identity function and be a mirror image having all (x,y) of  g(x) inverted into (y,x).  

The following functions in blue are the same graph. g(x) starts at x and finds y h(y) starts at y and finds x but have same ordered pairs because they are the same equation written in different terms of x or y.

g(x) = y			inputting x outputs y			(given a y and asked to find x)
h(y) = x			inputting y outputs x			(given a y and asked to find x)
g(x) = 6∛x –3 + 5		inputting x outputs y			g(x)=h(y) but are written in different terms
h(y) = (y–5)/6 + 3 		inputting y outputs x			both functions are the blue graph in picture

The function g(x) is the initial function. The function h(y) is the return function.
We should call a return function an anti-function.
This is the inverse function to both g(x) and g(y). It is shown in red on the graph.
If I graph g(x) the blue graph appears. If I graph h(y) the blue graph appears.
These are the same graph but g(x) is written in terms of x and h(y) is written in term of y.

i([y]) = 6∛[y]–3 + 5 this function is an inverse and swaps (x,y) into (y,x)

g(x)= function 	h(y)= anti function 
   
 y = 6∙∛x–3 +5		 	 x = ((y–5)/6)3 + 3 
–13 = 6∙∛x–3 +5 		 x = ((–13–5)/6)3 + 3	
–18 = 6∙∛x–3 			 x = ((–18)/6)3+3	
–3   = ∛x–3			 x = (–3)3+3 
–27 =   x–3 			 x = –27+3
– 24 = x  found x		 x = –24   found x	






Any two inverse or anti functions, or opposites cancel and leave the x unchanged.
f-1(f(x)) = x			inputting a function frees x 	(reciprocal functions)

This means I had “x” then “performed series of operations” then “canceled series of operations” leaving only x.
Reciprocal functions cancel.

Examples:

If sin(x)= y then sin-1(sin(x)) = x		If sin(45)= √2/2       then sin-1(sin(45)) = 45
If sin(x+5)= y then sin-1(sin(x)) = x+5		If sin(45+5)= 0.766 then sin-1(sin(45+5)) = 50

We have pure math, and graphing. 

Pure math: In pure math x has a function applied to it and changes it to a different number called y. If we want to change y back into x we have to apply an inverse function. The two functions cancel and y changes back into x. If during a complicated equation we have one function that changes x and another function that cancels that operation we call those two functions inverses of each other. In practice this is easier than explaining. Two functions will cancel making your equation simpler.
6sin(x)+4 = y
sin(x)+4 = y/6
sin(x) = y/6 – 4
x =sin-1(y/6 – 4)	this isolates x so we can solve it. 

f(x)= 6sin(x)+4
f-1(f(x)) = x		this isolates x so we can solve it. The “f-1()” is the anti function to isolate x.

These are called reciprocal operations. They “cancel”. We are trying to get an x that is buried in a bunch of operations called a “function”. To unbury it we apply an inverse function which is all the inverse operation to isolate x.

If x+4 = 7 we work backwards by doing x +4–4 = 3. This is called an inverse operation.
If we use function notation the function is f(x) = x+4.
If we set the function to y then                      y = x+4	we are get infinite solutions.
We want when y = 7 so			7 = x+4	this is just a one variable equation with 1 solution.

We are saying y = 7. This makes y always the answer to algebra problems. Then we think in terms of y always is the answer and x as a missing number that helps sum to y.		
   



Graphing: Graphs take one variable equations and plot solutions as points on a rectangular grid system. Graphing and pure math are two very different things. We can solve by doing algebra or solve by graphing. Whatever the case we have an equation and we solved it. turn it around we have a formula called a linear equation

f(x) = y				identity function x=y





Polynomial division aka rational expressions
Polynomials can be divided.

The equations we work with most in Algebra are either sums, linear, quadratic or cubic.

1. An equation with xo is called a sum. 2∙3+17 = 23 
2. An equation with x1 is called a linear expression. 2x∙3 + 17 = 6x+17
3. An equation with x2 is  called a quadratic expression. (2x∙3+17)∙x = 6x2 +17x
4. An equation with x3 is called a cubic expression. (2x2∙3+17)∙x = 6x3 +17x

If we perform arithmetic and the numbers do not contain variables we call them constants. No constants have a variable quality so we say the variable is canceled. In 6x+17 the constant 17 has a different base than 6x so they can not combine. This makes 6x and 17 terms that are not alike. 6x has a base of x to the first power and 17 has a base of x to the power of zero. Having a power of zero means the x is canceled so we do not write it much like we do not write the exponent of 1 on 6x.

 Ax2+Bx+C written with powers of x shown is really Ax2+Bx1+Cx0.
 Ax3+Bx2+Cx+d written with powers of x shown is really Ax3+Bx2+Cx1+Dx0.

Formula
With powers of x shown
illustration
illustration with powers
Ax+By=C
Ax1+By1=Cx0
2x –3y =15  
2x1y0 –3y1x0 =15x0y0
Ax2+Bx+C
Ax2+Bx1+Cx0
3x2–6x+9
 3x2–6x1+9x0 
Ax3+Bx2+Cx+d
Ax3+Bx2+Cx1+Dx0  
2x3+12x2–4x+2  
2x3+12x2–4x1+2x0

Polynomial division requires strong factoring and understanding of like terms.
The point of factoring polynomials is to be able to divide them, not just factor.
People tend to understand like terms when there is some x but do not understand that constants are like.
If you can add two terms and combine it into one term then they are alike.
Constants do not have variables. If they did 3+7 = 10 would be 3x0+7x0 = 10x0 = 10.

Base ∙ height = Area
(x+2)(x+4) = x2 +6x+8

Product               ÷   first factor    = 	second factor 
x2+6x+8	    ÷ 	(x+2) 	     =	 (x+4)
(x3+6x2+8x)     	    ÷	(x2+6x+8)  =	 (x)	 	multiplying a quadratic by x turns it into a cubic
x3+13x2+50x+56  ÷      (x+7)        = 	(x2+6x+8)	multiplying by a like binomial gives standard form

(x3+6x2+8x+7x2+42x+56) = x3+13x2+50x+56  			

Canceling is reducing a fraction 
(x+3)(x+3)(x+3)(x+3)		(x+3)(x+3)(x+3)(x+3)		(x+3)(x+3)(x+3)(x+3)		(x+3)(x+3)(x+3)(x+3)		
(2x+6)2(x+3)			(2x+6)(2x+6)(x+3)		2(x+3)2(x+3)(x+3)		(x+3)(x+3)(x+3) (2∙2)

(x+3)  •  (x+3) •  (x+3)  •  (x+3)		(x+3)  •  (x+3) •  (x+3)  •  (x+3)	draw a vertical line down each cancellation	
(x+3)    (x+3)    (x+3)     (2∙2)		(x+3)    (x+3)    (x+3)     (2∙2)	for the number “1”. 

I draw a line down each fraction to cancel it to 1. Then I multiply by all the 1's to cancel them. Them I am left with (x+3)/4. Instead of leaving my x in the numerator I separate the fraction again like x/4+¾. Separating the fractions is the distributive property for division. What does  x/4+¾ equal?
x/4+¾ = ?
x/4+¾ = y
¼x + ¾  =  y
y = ¼x +¾		this is the y intercept formula

You probably realized what to cancel but did not see other things. This is why we teach canceling this way. 
It teaches the distributive property for division,  that you can split fractions even with strange terms, to rewrite answers into something familiar, to cancel by reducing a fraction to 1 by dividing something by itself. This reduction leaves 1 as a multiplicative factor that further cancels under multiplication. For simple math this is easy to neglect but for hard math nothing is neglected.

(x+3)/(x+3)•(x+3)/(x+3)•(x+3)/(x+3) = (x+3)/4 becomes 1/1∙1/1∙1/1∙(x+3)/4 becomes 1∙1∙1∙(x+3)/4 becomes 1∙(x+3)/4.

We skip obvious steps like this unless explaining a fundamental property. We would never spend this much time solving multiplication of 1. This does help dealing with physics or ∞. How would you solve 3x+∞ –1/1–∞ –3x?   
The answer is – 1. We learn this in rational expressions with like denominators.

3x+∞ –1/1–∞ –3x = ?			If you have no clue at least try
3x–1+∞/–3x+1–∞			I would probably try to rewrite first 
3x–1+∞/–1(3x–1+∞)			Then factor out a –1 in the bottom
1/–1∙1					I would try to cancel (3x –1+∞) with itself making it 1/–1∙1 
–1					this seems about right

Canceling infinity is a calculus subject using the L'Hopitál rule but this just shows that hard problems are solved with simple basics.     Understanding fraction laws helps to understand canceling ∞.





We are factoring to lead up to the quadratic formula so I will add two more seemingly unrelated topics.

1. A square root can be positive or negate.
A cubic root of a negative number is always negative so a cubic root of a positive is always positive.
The square root of 4 is ±2 the plus or minus symbol means both versions. 
This is used for quadratics but never the Pythagoras theorem where side lengths must be positive.

2. Rationalizing a denominator simpleness answers.
3. If x = 1/√3 then we simplify the fraction by multiplying by its conjugate
4.  √3/√3



 

 
If factoring is too hard (multiple terms, powers, and variables) or divisor is not a factor we do long division:
To divide x3+13x2+50x+56 by x+8 we first write long division box like x+8 |x3+13x2+50x+56.
     
1.         x2					  			
x+7 |x3+13x2+50x+56 		Divide first term x3 by x and write x2 above it.

2.         x2					  			
x+7 |x3+13x2+50x+56 		Multiply x2 with x+8 and write answer under x3.
        x3+ 7x2				

3.         x2					  			
x+7 |x3+13x2+50x+56 			
   –   x3+ 7x2			Write the vinculum line for subtraction and subtract.
       0x3+6x2     		Write answer like regular division. Make sure the first term cancels

4.         x2					  			
x+7 |x3+13x2+50x+56 			
   –   x3+ 7x2  							
       0x3+6x2 +50x		Bring down next term and repeat process.

5.         x2	+6x				  			
x+7 |x3+13x2+50x+56 			
   –   x3+ 7x2							
       0x3+6x2 +50x		How many times does x go into 6x2? x∙6x = 6x2 so write 6x at the top.
           – 6x2 +42x  		Then multiply 6x with x+7 and write product on this line and subtract.  	            8x+56		50x – 42x = 8x. Bringing down the next term we have 8x+56
			
6.         x2	+6x +8				  			
x+7 |x3+13x2+50x+56 			
   –   x3+ 7x2							
       0x3+6x2 +50x			
           –6x2 +42x  		 	
                0x2+8x+56		How many times does x go into 8x? x∙8 = 8x so write 8 at top.	
	       –  8x+56		Multiply 8 with x+7 and write product on this line and subtract. 
		0x+0		We have no more terms and no remainders left so we are down.

If you have a remainder left then write it as “ +(remainder/divisor)”.
For example if instead of 0x+0 we had 0x+5 we would write 5/(x+7) as “ +(5/x+7)” this is the same as regular division and remainders:

                   3            3  				          3+ 1/3	3+⅓ = 3 +0.3 =  3.3 
3|10   → 3|10 →  3|10                			 →3|10 
		      – 9
		         1	   this is a remainder of 1 	 	

	        2	          2				          2+3/5 	2+⅗ = 2 +0.6 =  2.6 		
5|13   → 5|13 →  5|13                			 →5|13 
                  10       – 10
                                 3 this is a remainder of 3

When you have a remainder write at above the divisor as a fraction then add it to the whole number.
Mentally convert regular fractions to decimals; write polynomials down as a fraction being added.
Divide 3x3+7x+5 by x+3

        3x2				3x3÷x = 3x2	write this at top
x+3| 3x3+0x2+7x+5  			write 0x2 because it doesn't have a x2 term 
    –  3x3+9x2				3x2 ∙(x+3) = 3x2+9x2	write this at bottom

        3x2				
x+3| 3x3+0x2+7x+5  			
    –  3x3+9x2				
	 –9x2+7x			0x2 –9x2 = –9x2  write this at bottom and bring down next term   			  
     3x2	–9x 				– 9x2 ÷ x = – 9x write this at top	
x+3| 3x3+0x2+7x+5  			
    –  3x3+9x2				
	 –9x2+7x						   					  
       –  ( –9x2 –23x )   			– 9x∙(x+3) = – 9x2 – 23x write this on this line and subtract from above.
	   2				BE CAREFUL! You are subtracting a negative so direction changes

You have –9x2 + 7x and need to subtract –9x2 – 23x. Every line we are supposed to use () for our subtrahends so that we do not make mistakes dealing with negative operations.   Write terms inside  – () with minus sign outside and to the left. The only mistake people tend to make is right here. People get the hang of it and start going fast and get sloppy. You can write down separately on scratch paper but I do not think you need to.

–9x2+7x –(–9x2–23x) =	 –9x2+7x +9x2+23x =	0x2 + 30x 	because subtracting a () flips all signs in the ()  

     3x2	–9x 				– 9x2 ÷ x = – 9x write this at top	
x+3| 3x3+0x2+7x+5  			
    –  3x3+9x2				
	 –9x2+7x						   					  
       –  ( –9x2 –23x )   			
	    0x2 +30x+5			write your difference here and bring down last term 	


     3x2	–9x +30				
x+3| 3x3+0x2+7x+5  			
    –  3x3+9x2				
	 –9x2+7x						   					  
       –  ( –9x2 –23x )   			
	    0x2 +30x+5			  30x÷x = 30 so write that at top		 	
	       –   30x+90		   30∙(x+3) = 30x+90 write on this line and subtract 
		  0x –85	  we have no more terms so this is a remainder of –85, sum as a fraction – 85/x+3

 Our final quotient is 	 3x2–9x+30 + –85/x+3 . Multiplying this back to x+3 will equal the original polynomial. 	              																			(x2 + 12x + 36) ÷ (x + 9)
         	x+3+ 9/x + 9		
x + 9| x2 + 12x + 36 							this is more bare bones
         x2 +   9x		= x		first term is x
	      3x  +36		
	      3x  + 27	= 3		second term is 3	
                                     =9/x + 9	we have a remainder 9/x+9

more examples...

(y+4)(y – 6 – 6/y+4)	  	Our factors		
(y+4)(y – 6) + (y+4)(–6/y+4)	  	Using distributive property to change (a+b)(c+d+e) to ((a+b)(c+d)) + ((a+b)(c))
y2 – 6y +4y – 24 – 6	  	Multiplying. Using the distributive property makes canceling easier. 	
y2 – 2y – 30	 	  	Combining like terms. This matches our original dividend so we divided correctly.

(y2 – 2y – 30)÷ (y+7)

y+4|y2 – 2y – 30 
       y2 +4y	= y		(y+4)(y) = y2 + 4y
	–6y – 30			(–2y) – (4y) = – 6y. Bring down the – 30
	– 6y –24	= – 6 		(y+4)(– 6) = – 6y – 24. 
	            6			(– 30) – (– 24) = – 6. We have a remainder of 6. Write as 6/(y+4).

(y+4)(y – 6 – 6/y+4)	  	Our factors		
(y+4)(y – 6) + (y+4)(–6/y+4)	  	Using distributive property to change (a+b)(c+d+e) to ((a+b)(c+d)) + ((a+b)(c))
y2 – 6y +4y – 24 – 6	  	Multiplying. Using the distributive property makes canceling easier. 	
y2 – 2y – 30	 	  	Combining like terms. This matches our original dividend so we divided correctly.	

(2r2 – 3r – 35) ÷(2r+7)

2r+7 |2r2 – 3r – 35 
         2r2 + 7r		= r		cancel first term (2r2 – 2r2 = 0r2) add (7)(r)
	   – 10r – 35			subtract (– 3r) – (7r) and get – 10r. Bring down – 35
	   – 10r – 35	= 5		cancel – 10r – 35 with (– 10r – 35) – (–10r – 35) = 0r + 0 
					(–10r) – (– 10r) = 0, (– 35) – (– 35) 
(2r+7)(r – 5)	              			 check your work...	
2r2 – 10r + 7r – 35		
2r2 – 3r – 35				...it checks
(3t2 – 14t – 24) ÷(3t +4)	

We do not have a remainder because everything canceled under addition. Additive inverses sum to zero. 
Try to subtract terms one at a time instead in pairs to avoid confusion over signs. In (– 10r) – ( – 10r) the negative signs in the parentheses are are the sign of the number, and the red minus sign between them is the operation sign. The difference is in usage.  When adding or subtracting a string of numbers the total is called a sum. When summing two numbers the first number is the starting point, followed by the operation sign and the the second number. If the operation sign matches the sign of the number you add, if the signs do not match you subtract. If ++ or – – then add, if + – or – + then subtract. Positive numbers are written without a sign and negative numbers are written with a negative sign. Negative numbers are therefore also called signed numbers which is short for negative sign numbers as you have to write a – sign in front of them.

(1) + (3)    	= 4		(+) + (+) = add 		last two signs match
(1) – (– 3) 	= 4		(+) – (–) = add		last two signs match
(– 1) + (3) 	= 2		(–) + (+) = add		last two signs match
(– 1) – ( – 3) 	= 2		(–) – (–) = add		last two signs match

(1) –  (3)    	= – 2		(+) – (+) = subtract 	last two signs don't match
(1) + (– 3) 	= – 2		(+) + (–) = subtract	last two signs don't match
(– 1) – (3) 	= – 4		(–) – (+) = subtract	last two signs don't match
(– 1) + (– 3) 	= – 4		(–) + (–) = subtract	last two signs don't match

The sign of the first number is unimportant in deciding whether to add or subtract.
Confirm the value of the first number, then look at the operation sign and the sign of the second number. If both signs match add if they don't subtract. Two negatives cancel to a positive sign; 1 – ( – 3) = 1+3.

The rules can be written as ++/ –– = add, +– /–+ = subtract. The slash in this case means “or”.

++/ – – = add because signs match
+ – /– += subtract because they don't match
a negative sign in front of a quantity in parentheses means to “negate” the signs. Also called “flip the signs”, you have to change every positive to a negative and negative to a positive. – (x + 1) = – x+1. Distribute by multiplying every term by – 1. For polynomial division it is easier to subtract terms one at a time rather than negate an entire quantity. Sign flipping is not required here but is in other math.
	t – 6
3t + 4|3t2 – 14t – 24 
          3t2 +   4t 
          0t2 – 18t – 24
	   – 18t – 24 

3t2 /3t = t so write t above the division box. Take t and multiply it with the divisor (3t + 4) and write the product under the dividend. You should have 3t2 + 4t. Subtract these two terms from the two terms above it.

(3t2 – 14t) – (3t2 + 4t) = – 18t		As written we have a quantity minus a quantity. 
3t2 – 14t + –1(3t2 +  4t = – 18t		Distribute the first quantity by multiplying by 1, the second by – 1.
3t2 – 14t + –3t2 –  4t = – 18t		+ – 3t2 the signs cancel to – 3t2 because we are adding a negative.
3t2 – 14t – 3t2 –  4t = – 18t 		– 14t + – 3t2 becomes – 14t – 3t2 because the signs do not match.
3t2 – 3t2 – 14t –  4t = – 18t 	    	reordering terms we can see that the 3t2 terms sum to 0.

We had (3t2 – 14t) which is simply 3t2 – 14t. Parentheses imply multiplication. To remove parentheses you must multiply by 1. 
(3t2 – 14t) becomes 1(3t2 – 14t). Removing parentheses invokes distribution.  To turn (3t2 – 14t) into 3t2 – 14t we move them out of the brackets. Distributing them out means taking them out.

(3t2 – 14t)
1(3t2 – 14t)
1∙(3t2 – 14t)
1∙3t2 + 1∙ – 14t 
3t2 – 14t

Normally we do this instinctively in one step, (a+b) = a+b. This obscures all the hidden movements and rules invoked. 
Detailed explanations show all the moves but when working skip any tedious steps.

We had – (3t2 + 4t). There is a “–” in front of the parentheses. This invokes multiplication by – 1. 
This is called sign flipping or flipping signs. We had to “flip the signs” to remove the parentheses.

– (3t2 + 4t)		we are subtracting the quantity (3t2 + 4t)
– 1(3t2 + 4t)  		we multiply by – 1 to distribute the sum out of the parentheses
– 3t2 – 4t		this negates the positive sign of both numbers making them both negative

Notice both numbers became negative. We could not simply write (3t2 – 14t) – (3t2 + 4t) as 3t2 – 14t – 3t2 + 4t because all we are doing is erasing both parentheses leaving the “4t” positive when it should be negative! To remove parentheses you need permission by following specific rules from arithmetic. Simply removing parentheses in this case as illustrated breaks the rules of distribution and is an illegal operation. 

We had a (3t2 – 14t) – (3t2 + 4t), notice it is (sum) – (sum). It becomes 3t2 – 14t – (3t2 + 4t) because the first number or quantity is unimportant sign wise as there will be no changing of signs. It stays whatever sign it originally had. Then it becomes 3t2 – 14t + – 3t2 – 4t and then 3t2 – 14t – 3t2 – 4t.

(3t2 – 14t) – (3t2 + 4t)		(sum) – (sum)
(3t2 – 14t) + – 1∙(3t2 + 4t)		change “ –” to “– 1” and write a “+” to separate the sums.

The “ – (3t2 + 4t)” has to change to “ – 3t2 – 4t” because that is the rules of distribution:

(a+b) – (3 + 4)	= a+b – 3 – 4	= a+b – 7  		You can not have (a+b) – (3 + 4) = a+b – 3 + 4 
(a+b) – (3 + 4) = (a+b) – (7)	= a+b – 7

When canceling out terms we are subtracting using long subtraction but mostly doing it mentally in our heads. (3t2 – 14t) – (3t2 + 4t):

          (3t2 – 14t)	  	this is like	10x	  or even		10
         – (3t2 + 4t			            –  7x		         –	  7
	      – 18t 		 	  3x       			  3          

but the mixed sings throws people off and they tend to add when the should subtract. Also we normally do not write the subtraction sign in front of the long form (nor the horizontal lines or the “()”).



(3t2 – 14t) – (3t2 + 4t) is:	3t2 – 14t
			3t2 +   4t
 			      – 18t 

People tend to read this as 3t2 – 3t2 = 0 which is correct but make a mistake with – 14t + 4t = – 10t. 
The correct answer is – 18 because we are subtracting a positive not adding a positive.

(3t2 – 14t) – (3t2 + 4t) is: both 3t2 are positive so (+) – (+) means subtract. We are taking a positive number and subtracting a positive number from it. This could be written as (3t2) – (3t2) = 0. Only write the first terms of the binomials but do so mentally and subtract them to find the difference. The second terms are – 14t and 4t. Write this as (– 14t) – (4t). 
We are taking a negative number and subtracting a positive number from it. 
Subtracting a positive is just regular subtraction: 4 – 1 = 3 because we subtracted positive 1, (4) – (1) = (3).

If a number has a “–” in front of it like – 1 we call it a negative number because there is no operation to perform. If there is two numbers separated by only one “–” then we consider the subtrahend to be positive.

If: ±Minuend – subtrahend = difference
Then: subtrahend is positive, we are subtracting a positive, that is regular subtraction
Example: 4 – 1 = 3

If: ±Minuend – – subtrahend = difference  
Then: subtrahend is negative, we are subtracting a negative, two negative signs cancel, and so we add.

Whether the minuend is negative or positive is irrelevant. What matters is the sign of the operation and the sign of the subtrahend.

In division we are trying to find a difference so we are subtracting. This is similar to a system of equations where we subtract one polynomial from another. A polynomial can have a string of positive and negative numbers. When dividing a polynomial by another polynomial we run into sign problems because of how the problem is written when worked. Most problems from math come not from following the right process but rather sloppy writing. The numbers are disorganized and signs are unclear. A hand written 3t + 4t might look like 3++4t and lead to someone writing 4t + 3 as answer instead of 7t.


3t + 4|3t2 – 14t – 24 	     	 We have to divide 3t2 by 3t. The answer is t. We expand t(3t + 4) under the dividend 
          3t2 +   4t 	= t 	     	 We write t either above or to the right. We wrote to the right. 
                – 18t – 24	     	 We have to subtract (3t2 – 14t) – (3t2 +4). It is – 18t. 
	    – 18t – 24    = – 6 	 We right – 18t under the problem.  We bring down the next number (– 24)
	    	                   	 We have to divide – 18t by 3t. It is – 6. We expand – 6(3t+4) under – 18t – 24
	
3t2 – 14t – 24 is the dividend.
3t + 4 is the divisor.
3t2 + 4t is the subtrahend with the dividend as the minuend.
– 18t – 24 is the difference between the subtrahend and the dividend.
– 18t – 24 (in red) is the product of – 6(3t + 4) which will be used as a subtrahend with the previous difference.

The previous difference is divided by 3t to find the right factor. The right factor is multiplied back to 3t + 4 to cancel the difference. If the difference between (previous difference) – (new product) = 0 and there are no remaining terms to bring down we are done and there is no remainder. If there is a result other than 0 and no terms to bring down then we have a remainder “r” that is written as r/(divisor). Our answer will be:

(quadratic or other polynomial)÷(binomial divisor or other divisor)=  (±variable term±constant) or (±variable term±constant±r/divisor)

0x2 + 29x + 21/5x +7

5x +7|10x2 + 29x + 21		because “|” is same as division box I do not need to overline the dividend 
          10x2 + 14x	       = 2x		write Ax2 under itself, divide it by Ax in divisor, add product of (Ax2/Ax) and divisors constant     
	       15x + 21		we subtracted: (29x + 21) – 14x = 15x +21  	
	       15x + 21 = 3		(5x+7)3 = 15x – 21, write this under our partial sum 15x +21. (15x +21) – (15x +21) cancels. 

(5x + 7)(2x +3) = 10x2 + 29x + 21	

Ax2 – Ax2 = 0 the first term should cancel
15x – 15x = 0 the second term should cancel
21 – 21     = 0 the last term should cancel. If it doesn't then you have a remainder. Your remainder will be written as “+r/divisor”.
Sports 		A football field, not including endzones, is 160 feet wide by 100 yards long. 
		A polo field is 160 yards wide and 300 yards long. How many football fields would it take to fill one pop field?
		nine	
		
Statistics		A recent survey found that American teenagers between the ages of 12 and 17 watch television an average of 22 			hours per week. 

a. 		How much television does the average American teenager watch in one year?

22∙52 = 1144 hours


b. 		If about 20% of all television time is for commercials, how much time does the average American teenager spend 			watching commercials each year?

1144∙.2 = 228.8 hours

 Physics		Weights of 50 pounds and 75 are placed on a lever. The two weights are 16 feet apart. And the lever is balanced. 
		How far from the fulcrum is the 50-pound weight? 9.6ft

Make a diagram to solve the problem.

An ant is climbing a 30-foot flagpole. Each day it climbs up 7 feet. Each night it slides back 4 feet. 
How many days will it take it to reach the top of the flagpole? 10 days

30ft∙days /(7ft – 4ft) = 30ft∙ days/3ft = 10days

day
Avg gain 
Total gain
1
3
3
2
3
6
3
3
9
4
3
12
5
3
15
6
3
18
7
3
21
8
3
24
9
3
27
10
3
30
	
	
10∙days = 10∙24∙hours = 240∙hours= 240∙60∙minutes = 14400∙minutes= 14400∙60∙seconds= 864,000∙seconds
864,000 ∙ 1 second = 864,000 seconds

Simplify 9xyz5/x4 = 9yz5/x3

Factor p2 + 10p + 25 = (p + 5)2

Find y2/x2 ÷ a2/x2 = y2/a2
 
(x2 + 7x + 12) ÷ (x+3) = x + 4		this is solved by mental factoring, C/m=n Bx = mx+nx 12/3 = 4 
						(x +3)(x+?) = (x+3)(x+4)     	3x+4x = 7x, (3)(4) = 12	

Hopefully those examples will help you.
What relationship is there between the degree of the divisor, the degree of the dividend, and the degree of 	the quotient? 
The degree of the dividend is the product of the degree of the divisor and the degree of the quotient.

What is a factor? Is 3 a factor of 7? Is 2x a factor of 4x3?
Two factors (or more) are numbers that are multiplied to produce a result. The result is called a product.
	A factor is a divisor of a dividend that results in a integer solution. When dividends only have 1 and itself as factors the 	dividend (number) is called a prime number. 7 is prime so 3 cannot be a factor of 7. 
	2x is a factor of 4x3 because dividing 4x3 by 2x results in a integer solution. In the case of monomials or binomials 
	(or polynomials) a quotient result with integer coefficients is considered an integer solution.

Is it possible for a complex fraction to be its own reciprocal. Yes if you cheat, 1 is its own reciprocal. Write a fraction then divide it by itself. It will cancel to 1 and since 1 is its own reciprocal the complex fraction is its own reciprocal. 

Synthetic Division

Synthetic division uses matrix like techniques to divide. This only works when your divisor is degree 1.
We will create a box and divide using only the coefficients.

      1 – 4 – 12				Take something like x2–4x–12 ÷(x–6) and list coefficients like this:
                          

6˩  1 – 4 – 12				Use the additive inverse  of the divisors constant in angle box
                          
 
6˩  1 – 4 – 12	
      1                    			write first coefficient under vinculum (the bar)	

6˩  1 – 4 – 12	
           6                			write product of box number and bottom number  
           1					

6˩  1 – 4 – 12	
            6          		
      1    2				write the sum of the middle column under the bar	

6˩  1 – 4 – 12	
            6    12 				write product of box number and bottom middle number as shown    
        1    2

6˩  1 – 4 – 12				
            6    12         
      1    2     0    			sum third column and write total below line

The result is 1x+2 +0 remainder. 1 2 0 is the coefficients and the remainder, this does not have a remainder so our answer is x+2. Use 3x2+5x+1 ÷x+4:

–4˩   3   5   1		–4˩   3   5    1		– 4˩  3    5      1
                                               –12                              –12  –28     
        3  		         3	 –7 		         3  –7    27  = 3x – 7 + 27/x+4

Since dividend had a power of three the quotient will have a power of 1.
You can only do synthetic division when you have a divisor of power 1, also called monic.
This isn't very useful unless working up to actual matrix row reduction. It helps start thinking matrix-like.
We will see where this will benefit us later.







Quadratics	

In simple terms a number with a square in it as the leading term is a quadratic.
More precisely a quadratic is a second degree polynomial of one variable. 
The most important part of algebra is memorizing the quadratic formula. All work so far was to prepare for this.
Quadratics will be taught in four parts:
1. Completing the square                
2. The quadratic formula                
3. Solving quadratics                      
4. converting to the vertex formula
Complete the square:
A quadratic can be interpreted in three ways: as a number, a figurative area, or a geometric rectangle having area. Many things with geometric interpretations are just numbers that use shapes to describe a ratio. This is due in part to the Greeks who used shapes this way.

Solve x2 = 81 and then   x3 = 1000   x2 =24 

  x2  = 81	  		   x3 = 1000 			  	  x2   = 24
√x2  = √81			 ∛x3 = ∛1000 				√x2  = √24
   x  = 9			     x = 10				  x     = √24

81 is a square because it factors are 92 or 9∙9. 24 is not a square because it does not have a set of two factors that match. The square root of 24 is ≈ 4.89. 81 has whole numbers for square roots while 24 does not. If a number has whole numbers for square roots we call it a “square” number because we “square” a number to produce it. Squares are the product of multiplying a number by itself. In geometry a square is a shape, in algebra a square is a pure number with any units of length or rate attached to it. It is just a number.  We call whole numbers integers so we say that 81 has integer solutions for roots.

The square root of 24 is irrational. Irrational sounds like it means crazy but in math means something else. A rational number is a fraction written with integers for the numerator and denominator. Rational numbers terminate while irrational number are non-terminating. Terminate means the decimal ends after a certain point while non-terminating means the numbers never end. Fractions like ⅓ or ⅐ are non-terminating but because they have a repeating pattern we call them rational fractions. We can write ⅓ or ⅐ as a ratio of two numbers (1,3) or (1,7). These are integers. We can not write √24 as a fraction using only two integers. Try it and see. Irrational numbers are the result of rooting a non-root-able number. Taking a square root from a non square or a cube root from a non cube produces irrational numbers. A number can contain square or cube numbers in it but rooting by some index other than the index that produces that square or cube will result in an irrational fraction.

Rational fractions can be written as an integer “P” divided by an integer “Q”. A rational fraction has the form p/q.
Irrational fractions cannot be written as p/q. They are radicals or something else. Irrationals are non terminating. 
Non terminating rational fractions are written at p/q but do not end.

Proper fraction p<q	improper fraction p>q		mixed fraction Z+p/q  

Classification of Numbers by Set Notation
Counting
Whole 
Integers 
Fractions 
Irrationals
Reals 
Complex 
1,2,3,4.....
0,1,2,3,4,...
…–3,–2,–1,0,1,2,3...  
...–¼, –⅕,0, ¼, ⅕...      
√2, √3, π, √5
The x axis
i = √–1 
0 not included
0 included
negatives included
Integer divided by integer
Non-terminating
root
√–1 excluded
√–1 included
Set ℕ
Set 𝕎
Set ℤ
Set ℚ 
Set 𝕀 
Set ℝ 
Set ℂ
We said that √81 is 9 but  –92 also equals 81 since –9∙–9 = 81.
The square root of a number when positive is called the principal square root.
The principal square root is used for ordinary equations. 
Quadratic equations use both the negative and principal roots during their operations. We use ± to indicate this.

Use factoring to solve 2x2 = 3 – x

2x2 = 3 – x			since the leading term has degree 2 this is a quadratic equation
2x2 +x –3= 0			set equation to 0 by clearing the right side ( subtract (3 –x ) from both sides)
2x2 +x –3= 0			when set to 0 this is the standard form of a quadratic ax2+bx+c = 0	
			
2x2 +x –3= 0

1. 2x2 +x –3              = 0	          factor by grouping, ac = 2∙3, a+c = 1
2. 2x2 +3x–2x –3      = 0	          ac = –6, b = 1.... 	3∙–2= –6 for ac ,   3+(–2) = 1 for b     
3. (2x2 –2x) +(3x–3) = 0	          match terms with common factors using the associative law
4.  2x(x–1)+3(x–1)   = 0	          factor out greatest common factor (gcf) , both nested binomials should match 
5. (2x+3)(x–1)	     = 0	          group excluded factors into first () and write one of the nested binomials

We have (2x+3)(x–1) =0. We need to solve for x using the zero product principle. People understand the zero product principle but struggle to apply it to quadratics. Quadratics is all about the zero product principle.

Zero product principle: Anything times 0 equals 0. If ab = 0 then one of them must be zero. Either a or b or both are zero: a∙0 = 0 or 0∙b = 0 or 0∙0 = 0. People understand this but get confused. Pay attention. 

(2x+3)(x–1) =0			If (a)(b) = 0 then at least one factor must be 0, which one? Is it a...or b... or both?	

Is a∙(x–1) = 0.... or (2x+3)∙b = 0..... or 0∙0 = 0? We will try to solve for x using both a = 0 and b = 0.

1. If a = 2x+3 and a is 0 then   	(0)∙(x–1)  = 0	  	transitive law			
2. If b = x–1  and  b is 0 then   	2x+3 ∙(0) = 0  	  	transitive law

We have  (0)∙(x–1) = 0	and	2x+3 ∙(0) = 0. What would make these statements true? Solve for x:

1. If a = 2x+3  		then  2x+3 = (0)		transitive law	a = 2x–3 = 0 

2x+3 = 0
2x = –3
x = –1.5		the statement is true  when x = –1.5 
2(–1.5)+3 = 0		check by substituting
–3+3 = 0		 

2. If b = x–1   		then   	x – 1 = (0)		transitive law	b = x–1 = 0
x–1 = 0
x = 1 			the statement is true  when x = 1
 	 (1)–1 = 0		  check by substituting

For (2x+3)(x–1) = 0 we have two solutions for x: Either x = – 1.5 or x = 1. Check by using substitution.  
2x +3 = 0				 x – 1 = 0
2(–1.5) +3 = 0				 (1)–1 = 0	x =1      
–3+3=0        x = –1.5 				  	


Quadratics are 2nd degree polynomials that have two solutions for x. We call solutions the roots or the zeros of x.
The last page is critical in understanding the roots of a quadratic and why and how to solve. There is a shorter way to say the last page but it is dense:

Summary
2x2              = 3 – x			some ratio of x:y written in all terms of x
2x2 –x +3    = 0			setting to 0 to get standard formula
(2x+3)(x–1) = 0			factoring...note that our product is 0 so one of the factors must be 0
(2x+3) = 0	or 	(x–1) = 0	which one is 0?
x = – 1.5	or 	x = 1		quadratics have 0, 1 or 2 solutions. Possible solutions are called candidates.
x = – 1.5 or 1				check solutions by substituting into original equation

For –1.5				For 1			
2x2 = 3 – x				2x2 = 3 – x
2(–1.5)2 = 3 – (–1.5)			2(1)2 = 3 –(1)
2(2.25) = 3+1.5				2(1) = 3–1
4.5 = 4.5	   reflexive		2 = 2	reflexive

Associate law allows us to change order during some operations.
Transitive law allows us to substitute by indirect means. If a= both b and c then b =c. 
Substitution law allows us to substitute equivalent sums for variables.
Reflexive law is a smarter way of saying “the math checks” , or a statement is “true”.

You are expected to know these properties of equality by now and be able to show your work and state which law is being used at every step. We are testing for not only correctness but also maturity. The way a 4th grader answers a math question is not the way a 10th grader does. We can choose to explain or respond at varying levels. At this level focus is on understanding the laws and proving you know when you are applying them.

When applicable I will try to give three levels of instruction “4th grade, 9th grade, and graduate level”. 
Using only 4th grade approaches is limited so students should make every effort to increase vocabulary and mathematical reasoning. If something is asked in mathematical language then it should be answered in mathematical language. If something is asked plainly than plain answers are appropriate. When we introduce new concepts we give informal descriptions. These descriptions help make tractable exotic terms but are not appropriate for higher coursework.  From informal descriptions we move on to rigorous definitions. Hopefully you will become very mathematically mature and be able to share your knowledge at varying degrees of intuition.


Before completing the square and quadratic formula next page:
If a denominator contains a square remove it by using a conjugate.
A conjugate is when two radicals are reciprocal,  (the fraction equals 1). 
We are trying to cancel the radical in the bottom by moving it to the top. 
Any number, even a radical, divided by itself is 1. √3÷√3= 1.
Rewrite 1/√3 so that the radical is in the numerator instead of the denominator.

(1/√3) ∙ (1)		we need to change 1 to √3/√3 so that it has a common denominator 		
1. (1/√3) ∙ (√3÷√3)	multiply the two fractions 	  
(1/√3) ∙ (√3 /√3)	we get this   (1∙√3)/(√3 ∙√3)
2. (1√3)  ÷ (√3∙√3)	for 1√3 the 1 cancels, for √3∙√3 the radical cancels. We are doing this: (√3)2 = 3		
3. (√3)/3			we are done
√3/3			this is the same as above

step 1 is      1/√3 ∙√3/√3    step 2	1∙√3/√3∙√3       which is	1∙√3/√3 2     last step   √3/3
A quadratic has exactly four forms. When we did factoring a polynomial it was to take a quadratic in standard form and put it in binomial factored form. 

The factors of x2 –5x+6 are (x–3)(x+2).  We can set any equation to four different things: f(x), y, a constant, or 0. 
If we set this quadratic to zero we set its factors to zero.

x2 –5x+6   = 0
(x–3)(x+2) = 0
x = – 2 or 3  

The solution to a quadratic for x is “the zeros of x”. This will always be the additive inverses of the constants of the binomial factors. For (x–3), x = 3. For (x+2) x = –2.

Completing the square

Completing the square can be used to solve any quadratic equation. 
Using the Quadratic formula is faster and is based off completing the square. 
Before I show the quadratic formula I will show completing the square.

Solve x2 +6x +4 by factoring:

There is a problem. The factors of C and not possibly add to B. The only factors of C are 1∙4, 2∙2, –1∙–4, –2∙–2. 
If we add them we get 4, 5, or their negative versions –4 and –5 . 

Solve by completing the square:

1. x2+6x+4    =f(x)		this is a quadratic function. Please solve for x intercept
2. x2+6x+4    =y			this is an extra step: set to y
3. x2+6x+4    =0			set to 0 to create an ordered pair of (x,0). 
4. x2+6x+4+5 =5			complete the square by adding a little bit
5. x2+6x+9     =5			sum C plus the little you added last step
6. (x+3)(x+3) =5			this is an extra step to show you get a perfect square			
7. (x+3)2 	     =5			write your perfect square in exponent notation
8.  (x+3)	     =±√5		root both sides and add (±) to show both positive and negative roots
9.  x 	     = ±√5 – 3		isolate x by clearing constant component of the factor 	
10. x	     = –3 ±√5		put constants in front of radical please
11. x 	     = –3±√5 		this says we have two solutions for x. We have –3 +√5 and –3 –√5. 
					 The solution set to the quadratic is x = –3±√5.

If you want an approximation, which we don't, √5 ≈ 2.23 so –3+2.23 = – 0.77 and –3–2.23 = –5.23.
x = –3+√5 	or x = –3–√5    looks nicer than messy decimals and we do to have to calculate them! Its a plus.

Check by substituting back into the original equation and not something else like an altered form of the original equation.  If it was set to a number and we altered it by setting to 0 than we would need to use the original number it was set to and NOT 0. In this case we are okay because the equation was not set to anything so we can use 0. Blue terms are positive and completely cancel with the red terms which are negative:

x2+6x+4 = 0						x2+6x+4 = 0
(–3+√5)2    +6(–3+√5)+4 = 0				(–3–√5)2+6(–3–√5)+4   = 0
 9–6√5+5–18+6√5+4    = 0				 9+6√5 +5–18–6√4 +4   =0   
4+5+9+6√5 –18–6√5    = 0 				4+5+9+6√5 –18–6√5    = 0 				
18+6√5    –18–6√5       = 0				18+6√5    –18–6√5       = 0 
I do not like that last example because it was hard to read. Use the quadratic formula which is easier. Moving on...

When we have a quadratic we really have a quadratic function. Function is like saying equation with many solutions that can be graphed. Using variables turns ordinary equations into functions. Eventually we will have to graph this using ordered pairs of (x,y). What we did and why it works:

Why it works

We had a quadratic that could not be factored because it was messed up. This is called an imperfect square. We added a number to make it square. If you square root a perfect square you get an integer instead of an irrational. Irrationals are to be avoided because they are not very familiar numbers, you know? Adding a little bit makes it give an integer solution. What we added made the quadratic a perfect square trinomial  

We had x2+6x+4=0 and turned it into this x2+6x+9=5 which is this (x+3)(x+3)=0. 
We used 9, there are many numbers that would have worked but 9 makes the most sense for multiple reasons. 
We use something called determinate to determine what number to use. The determine is (b/2a)2 which in our case is 9. The bx term was 6x so b = 6. We use half of b squared to get our number, 32 = 9.


Both images have the same “area” of x2 + 6x but one is a rectangle the other a square with a little bit missing. If we add the little bit we get a perfect square that can be factored as (x+3) for both sides. The little it needs is 9. The little always missing is b/2a for any perfect square trinomial.  b/2a is called the determinate.

How it works (spoiler alert! This borders on proofs students are required to do themselves in 10th geometry)

To completely understand quadratics would require vast knowledge in number theory and measure theory.
We had x2+6x+4 and could not factor it. This is frustrating. 
To avoid frustration to used algebra to manipulate it by leveraging ratios.

Ask yourself, “why did the polynomial equal 0?” and “why does our sum have variables and an x2 and x term?”

Setting the equation to 0 gives us an area of 0. This is based on indirect variation. This is a sneaky hack.
In math we use symmetry to solve hard problems. Setting to 0 gives us symmetry by treating the sum as a rectangle that scales to a square while maintaining same area.

“How do you add three numbers and it equals 0?” “how is that supposed to work?
This is a graphing trick that has area decreasing as side length in increases.
Obviously something is canceling to make area disappear.


Continued on next page....or go on to quadratic formula we are done with completing the square.


If we have a square: 10∙10 =100 → 102 =100 → x2 =100. We have a 1:1 ratio of two numbers or side lengths.

If we fix area at 100 and then make one side longer then the other side must get shorter. 
This alters the ratio from 1:1 to something else. We have a ratio for sides of a rectangle.

A rectangle: 2∙50 = 100 	1∙100 = 100 	½ ∙200 = 100 		⅒∙1000 = 100    100/∞ ∙∞= 100.      
Eventually we will have a side of almost zero and another side almost ∞ and still  have an area of 100.

We changed to a rectangle but still want to write it as x2. How very odd of a thing to do. Seems hacky.
How would you write the area of a rectangle as A=x2 ? What would x be?

To Create A Quadratic From Scratch

Find a rectangle and measure base and height. Use or rotate rectangle so that height is shorter than base. Transfer your height measurements to your base. You now have cut the base into two parts. The left part will have an area of height2 and the right part will have an area of height∙(base – height) = hb –h2.   

Area of left square: h2
Area of right square: hb –h2 
Area of both:h2+ hb –h2 = hb The squares cancel leaving hb which is the formula for area.

To mutate into an imperfect square divide right part into two equals parts vertically so that height side is same.
The right part hb–h2 was divided into:  2(hb–h2/2). Lets call this piece I so that I = hb–h2/2. 
Place I on top of left part “h2”. This should look like drawing below. 


A quadratic equation is a formula for area. We have two terms representing the area of our rectangle as a sum of the areas of a square and smaller rectangle. The rectangle area could  be bigger but unlikely. In fact As soon as x exceeds the coefficient of bx then x2 is bigger than bx.   When x = b then x2 =bx. Whatever x is for x2+6x any x greater than 6 will cause x2 to dominate 6x. x can be any number from 0 to ∞.

Claim
1. Domain of x where  x2 = 6x: {(6)}
2. Domain of x where  x2 < 6x: {(0,5.9)}			12 < 6, 22 < 12, 32 < 18, 42 < 24, 52 < 30, 5.92 < 35.9
3. Domain of x where  x2 > 6x: {(6.01,∞)}    		6.012 > 6.01∙6  = 36.012 > 36.006
4. Domain where x2 ≠6x:{(6>x>6)}  also  {(x<6 ∪ x>6)}

Proof
1. 62 = 6∙6 when x = 6 both squares are congruent having areas is 36 = 36.
2. The largest x2<6x can get is 5.92.  This sets an upper ceiling of 36. 5.92 = 35.981 since 9 repeats and 92 = 81.
3. Clearly  36.012001>36.006  proven by 12=1 lsd is 1. If 36.0001∙6 then lsd is 6 because 6∙1 = 6.
4. 6 is excluded from domain of x because there is a hole discontinuity as x→6. ■





Quadratic Formula


We did not answer all the questions we had about completing the square but must move on. 
The quadratic formula solves any quadratic equation but is overkill for easier problems that can be solve with factoring. This is for decimal, imaginary or square root roots. Yes I said “square root” roots. A square root root is √√2 ≈1.189. This is used in Trigonometric functions. 

I am going to teach the quadratic formula. This is square root intensive but not too bad. A full mastery of exponent laws is required. All algebra boils down to solving real applications using this formula. Everything else was just training to do this. If you learn one thing from algebra it should be memorizing this formula and being able to apply it to real life word problems involving two objects moving at different rates.  
Just think of it as a regular linear equation but degree 2.

Al Khwarizmi's Identity	(this guy invented algebra, he was Arab)

x2 – 14x – 1887 = 0		begin here
x2 – 14x = 1887		clear c term 
x2 – 14 + 49 = 1936		add (b/2)2 to “complete the square”
(x – 7)2 = 1936			factor 
x – 7 =  ± √1936		root and use ±
x – 7 = ± 44			
x = 7 ± 44			
x = – 37 or 51			this is the set of solutions called the “solution set”

Write your equation and set it to zero. Zero implies that nothing is added nor subtracted from the initial sum; it is tare. Before measuring anything your device has to be set to zero or else you can not track how much is missing or added.

1. Subtract c from both sides: ax2 + bx + c becomes ax2 + bx = – c
2. Add (b/2a)2 to both sides to make a perfect square: ax2 + bx + (b/2a)2 = – c + (b/2a)2
3. Write polynomial as a perfect square: ax2 + bx + (b/2a)2 becomes (x – (b/2a))2 
4. Take the square root of both sides and add a ± for the root to show both solutions.
5. Combine constants on the right side to isolate x
6. Find both solutions for x by adding and subtracting the root from the constant

The quadratic formula is derived from completing the square.

1. ax2+bx= – c				clear c by ± it
2.   x2 +b/ax = – c/a			completing the square only works with monic quadratics
3. x2 +(b/a)x +(b/2a)2  = – c/a +(b/2a)2		adding a little bit to fill tiny missing corner chunk
4. (x+b/2a)2 = –(4ac/2a2)+(b2/4a2) 		writing as a square
5. (x+b/2a)2 = b2-4ac/4a2			combining like fractions
6. x+b/2a = – ±√b2-4ac/2a 		rooting both sides and adding ±
7.      x  = –b ±√b2-4ac/2a 		clearing determinate



Deriving the Quadratic Equation 
Ax2 + bx + c = 0								
a(x2 + bx/a + c/a) = 0								factor out the leading coefficient
a((x2 + bx/a + (b/2a)2 ) + c/a – (b/2a)2 ) = 0					complete the square by adding and substracting the discriminate 
a((x + b/2a)(x + b/2a)  + c/a – (b/2a)2  ) = 0
a(        (x + b/2a)2 	 + c/a – (b/2a)2 )   = 0

We have to write the discriminant. This is a tricky important step.
c/a – (b/2a)2 = 4ac – b2/4a2 because we are subtracting one fraction from another. 
To do this we need common denominators. The least common denominator is 4a.

Original: c/a – (b/2a)2 →  c/a – b^2/4a2 →	c/a – (b2/4 ∙ a ∙ a)  →(c/a ∙ 4a/4a ) – (b/2a)2  →   4ac/4a2  – (b/2a)2   → 4ac – b2 / 4a2
    c/a – (b/2a)2 →  c/a – b2/4a2 →c/a –(b2/4 ∙ a ∙ a)  →(c/a ∙ 4a/4a ) – (b/2a)2  →   4ac/4a2  – (b/2a)2   → 4ac – b2 / 4a2

c/a has a denominator of a. (b/2a)2  has a denominator of 4∙a2.
To subtract we need to multiply c/a by 4a/4a to make its denominator have another “a” and “4”.
a((x+ b/2a)2 +4ac – b2/4a2 )= 0

Last Step Multiply a to all terms to finish.

a((x+ b/2a)2 + 4ac – b^2 /4a2 )	= 0
a((x+ b/2a)2 + 4ac – b^2 /4a2 )	= ax2 + bx + c
a(x+ b/2a)2 + a( 4ac – b^2 /4a2 )	= ax2 + bx + c
a(x+ b/2a)2 + ( 4ac – b^2 /4a)		= ax2 + bx + c

The formula is two parts: The negative of the determinate  –b/2a and the discriminate b2 – 4ac. 
The formula is actually a sum of two fractions  –b/2a ± √b2 –4ac/2a 

Deriving the quadratic formula is hard. There is even a cubic formula and quartic but we do not use them. 
They are much longer. It is much easier to memorize the quadratic formula then to derive it every time you 
solve a problem. Deriving it is much harder skill than actually using it. It has 13 parts...
1. –			–
2. – b			b
3. – b ±			±
4. – b± √			√
5. –b±√ b			b
6.  –b±√b2 		2
7. –b±√b2 –		–
8. –b±√b2 –4		4
9. –b±√b2 –4a		a
10. –b±√b2 –4ac		c
11. – b±√b2 –4ac /		/
12. – b±√b2 –4a /2		2
13. (–b±√b2 –4ac )/2a	a

I memorized the entire thing in 1 week and retained the knowledge permanently. It is said hard to remember but it isn't. The more you know about it the easier it is to remember. Use a calculator to find square roots until you can do it mentally. Knowing that there are 13 parts helps to remember. Try writing it down and see how far you can get until you forget a part.  The b parts are easy but things get blurry  about – 4ac and 2a. Also the entire thing is divided by 2a. Sometimes people divide the square root and then add/subtract the quotient from – b.
The more you practicing using it it will be easy to remember and avoid mistakes.
Knowing how to derive the formula completely comes after using it many times. 
This form solves all quadratics so that you never need to solve by factoring again, although factoring might be quicker.
At this point you should have all 3 linear equation forms memorized and the standard form for a quadratic.
You should be able to look at a formula and be able to interpret what variable you are supposed to substitute and what it does in the formula. You should have these solid foundational skills. We learn new words and terms so we can progress faster without having to repeat basic info everytime. Using big words saves time and energy rather than lengthy explanations that are not very helpful. There are shortcuts and faster methods to both completing the square and mental tricks for the quadratic formula you will learn. In time you will know what method to use when. If all else fails a calculator can solve quadratics if it uses CAS computer algebraic system.

Quadratic formula in action

x2+7x+13        13 is a prime number so factoring is out. We could complete the square but it would be very messy
x2+7x+13	use the quadratic formula: A =1 so we can ignore it in – 4ac and 2a , B= 7 and C = 13

(–7±√72 –4∙13)÷2	This is it. Write in substituted values in and solve. When writing 72 you can just write 49.
(–7±√49 –4∙13)÷2	Writing 49 instead of 72 is a time saver. You write b then b2 so whatever b is just square it. 
(–7±√49 –52)÷2	After squaring b2 simplify 4ac. Ignore the minus sign and multiply those 3 terms.
 (–7±√–3)÷2		Next subtract...Wow we have a negative square root... that means it's going to be √–1 = I.
(–7±√–3)÷2		3 is prime so we can not root it write it as 3i... (–7±3i)/2 is final answer. 
(–7±3i)/2		this would be written as a fraction

That was pretty fast...lets see what happen when we have a negative C term.

x2 +7x–13

– 7±√49 – 4∙–13 /2 	I wrote down 49 instead of 72 as a shortcut. This should be in () but do not want to steps.
– 7±√49 – –52  /2	multiply 4ac
– 7±√49 +52  /2 	cancel the double negative signs from 49 – –52. If C is – C then we add this point.
– 7±√101  /2		Wow 101 is prime... either this is good luck or bad. We can't root this either.
– 7±√101  /2		Is final answer. Use a calculator if you need a decimal answer.

Lets try a different that hopefully we can root... x2+8x –4

x2+8x –4
–8±√64 –42 /2		I already squared –82 and would have done 42 but wanted you to see it this way   
–8±√64 –16 /2		we should have just squared 4 last step. Note that – b2 is always positive.
–8±√48 /2		better... we have –8 ±√48  
–8±√2∙2∙2∙2∙3 /2	factor 48 and pull out squares
–8±2∙2√3 /2		normally we would just write 4 at this step. We had four factor so write 2∙2 outside √
–8±4√3 /2		the squares we pull out get multiplied to each other
–4±2√3		yes...its working... cancel the 2a term by dividing it with –b and the squares we pulled out
 
–4±2√3		this is as much as we can reduce. With quadratic formula you often have a radical left over 

– 4±2√3 is how we write our answer but it is two numbers... – 4+2√3  and – 4+2√3.
We can easily solve this mentally for a decimal approximation but is not required or even desirable.
– 4±2√3		Since √3 ≈ 1.73  2√3 is 2∙1.73. Multiplying by 2 is easy 3.46.
– 4±3.46
– 4 –3.56 = –7.56	take the absolute value of the two numbers then sum and write as a negative number
–4+3.46 = – 0.54	Do this: 4 –3 = 1 then	1–0.46 = 0.54 then –0.54 and you are done.    




Different ways to write a quadratic using standard formula

The standard formula sets the equation to 0. This differs from is something is added or taken away from it.
The Al Khwarizmi's Identity	starts in standard form but then clears the C term to complete the square.

While in Standard form a quadratic may be set to five things:

1. It can be Ax2+bx+c = y. This is a two variable function. Functions create ordered pairs. Every equation is algebra is a function. In this form it would be graphed as a parabola. Two unknowns makes a graph.

2. Nothing. It can be Ax2+bx+c. But this means it is set to or y. In this form it would be graphed as a parabola. If something squared graphs as a parabola then it means the equation has two variables.
If x2 = y then we have a function with endless ordered pairs of the form (x,y). 
If x2 = c then we have 1 unique solution that is  (x).
If x2 = c I am asked to solve for x. Solving for x means “the answer” is x, a single value on the number line called the x axis. We will discuss this at great length for all functions not just quadratics.

3. It can be be set to f(x) which means the exact same thing as “y”.
This is true for all functions not just quadratics.
Ax2+bx+c = y   ↔	y =Ax2+bx+c	 ↔	f(x) =Ax2+bx+c
please remember this so that you do not get confused and this we are just supposed to factor it and we are done, or factor it and set it to zero and we are done.

4. It can have a constant “c” for area like x2 =9 giving a single root of 3 as the answer.
The example “x2 = 9” is a monomial equation and yet a quadratic of the form x2 =y
If I add 1 we get “x2 +1 = 10” I have a binomial equation. This is a quadratic of the form x2+c.
It is a quadratic that is missing the bx term and is set to a constant. When something is set to a constant we say it is “solved for area” but we want to work backwards and “solve for x”. 
These two examples look like regular equations that we have already seen an are more likely to deal with.
People fail to realize this connection: Anything with something squared is a quadratic whether it is a polynomial that looks weird, of is just a power that needs to be rooted to find a single solution.

5. Another equation (equation is the same as of saying function) like x2 = x+2
Setting to another another equation means setting it to one of the two either forms:
If it contains a constant like this then isolating the constant  gives one unique answer. If one unique answer then you graph a vertical line of which only The x-intercept is a real solution for x making it a one term equation and not a function. Vertical lines are not functions they are single dots at (x,0) with imaginary lines extending above and below simply highlighting that location on the x axis as those lines serve no other purpose except maybe art. They are not a math answers but rather graphing anomalies. 

x2 = x+2 simplifies to x2 –x  = 2 so now we have a bx term but are still missing a c term.
If  x2 –x  = 2 then x = –1 or 3 because those are the only numbers that will solve our equation. 
I earlier said “a single solution” well quadratics can have up to 2 solutions and cubics can have up to 3.

If x2 = x+1 then we get the universal constant phi, “φ” which is irrational and ≈ 1.618. 
“Big φ” is 1.618 and “little φ” is 0.618. Graph x2 = x+1 and see what number it produces.
Pronounced “fee or fie”   it is the pattern found in nature that groups things together as closely as possible like seeds in a flowers and other growth. We study this in logarithms.





Complete the square:

1. x2 +14x					complete the square
2. x2 +14x	+c =0				write in standard form by adding c and setting to 0
3. x2 +14x +49 = 49			find c by using (b/2)2...divide b by 2 and square
4. x2 +14x +49 –49    =0			subtract the square but write like this do not cancel please

5. (x2 +14x +49) –49  =0			group this “perfect square trinomial”
6. (x+7)(x+7) – 49     =0			this step can be skipped because..
7. (x+7)2         –49     =0			we factor like this in exponent notation not binomial factor notation


Step (3) completes the square but we still need to write in exponent notation as in step (7).
This is called the vertex form of a quadratic: a(x–h)2 +k.
We use this form to find the ordered pair of the vertex. 
This form will be talked about later as it comes after solving quadratics. 
This form makes positioning the graph very easy.

This is a faster method to completing the square than way initially shown. We showed to long hard arduous way because we wanted to derive the quadratic formula to prove to you it was a legit formula and not something we made up. This looks way easier and is what you  should learn to do until you are competent. Then go back and learn how to complete the square from scratch to derive the quadratic formula to master algebra. 

Completing the square works on quadratics that are missing a c term.
A different version called the Al Khwarizmi (Quar-Ri-Ze-Me) identity is used when c term does not factor:

x2 +14x+5				Solve by using Al Khwarizmi identity (aka complete the square)
x2 +14x+5 = 0				set to 0 to indicate we have this proportion and added nothing yet
x2 +14x+5+44= 44			divide b by 2 and square to find c. Add missing part to complete square
x2 +14x+49 = 44			this is same as before except we only need to add 44 instead of 49
(x+7)2 = 44				same as before except quadratic equals 44 instead of 49
(x+7)2 – 44= 0				

We can see what is happening and how fast this method is. This works but is harder if we have decimals...

x2 +5x+5				Solve using any method
x2 +5x+5+6.25= 6.25			
x2+5x+11.25= 6.25
(x +2.5)2 +5 = 6.25	
(x +2.5)2 – 1.25 = 0			I used Al Khwarizmi identity


I skipped steps and showed the fastest approach for brevity. Al Khwarizmi method is stronger and quicker than completing the square. Al Khwarizmi knew his stuff and was no dummy. We show the long ways to gently guide students to the truth. Going quicker skips steps and obscures what is happening. You in time will learn all steps and it will be easy. Go slow and try to think thoughtfully about what you are doing and why. Start basic and add layers of skill to the foundation you already have. Do not build a math career on a foundation of quicksand.

B=5 so 5/2 = 2.5 so  2.52 = 6.25. Check with a calculator or memorize list of squares. 242 = 576 such that 2.42 = 5.76. 
We use calculators for quadratics but instead of just using the built in formulas to solve do all the arithmetic yourself and only use calculators for approximating radicals or checking your work. Make sure you can do it without the calculator. Once you can use the calculator to save time rather than find the answer for you.

1st example showing only the important parts:
		x2 +14x					complete the square
		x2 +14x	+c =0				write in standard form by adding c and setting to 0
		x2 +14x +49 = 49			find c by using (b/2)2...divide b by 2 and square
		x2 +14x +49 –49    =0			subtract the square but write like this do not cancel please	
		(x+7)2         –49     =0			(x+7)2 –49 = x2 +14x 

This creates an identical version to the original. If graphed both functions are the same:
		 x2 +14x=0								(x+7)2–49=0

Functions have two variables x,y that give point coordinates. The point of setting the equation to 0 is to find the x value when y =0. The point of that is more complicated. It borders on needing a calculus understanding.
A quadratic asks us to find the x intercepts.  The intercepts are the solutions called the solution set.
It is called the set because we expect two solutions, a positive and negative square root. The quadratic formula takes the square root of a quadratic and tells what the root is. If x∙x = y then √y = x. That is what a quadratic is...its power operation and we what to know the square root.

x = the square root. But we have a problem because it has terms added to it so solving is not straightforward.

x2+14x is factorable but not as two square roots. We get (x)(14) which are not roots because they do not match. For √x2+14x we can not say the answer is x or 14. We have to square root x2+14x and it is hard. 
It is hard because it is not a square!

When we complete the square we are doing this:
We have x2+14x =y
y = the area of a square and a rectangle

Dividing b → b/2 we shift it around like this.
Complete the square we add a little then subtract it.

We complete the square so we can get a trinomial to easier factor. We need that “chunk” added but if we add it we are changing the equation. We are getting “ our area” + “that chunk”. We can't have more than “our area” so we need to subtract it to cancel it.  We can square root a perfect square trinomial and completing the square is just adding a constant to our equation to be able to factor it but at the same time subtracting what we added so that we do not increase the area.

x2+14x		           cant factor into two matching squares.
x2+14x +49                 I can factor but I have added 49 to my area which is cheating and will give a false equation.
x2+14x +49 – 49         whatever I added I must subtract to keep the equation true.
(x+7)(x+7) – 49          and now I have factors that are matching roots! Success!		
(x+7)2 – 72	           this is a difference of two squares which we recognize as super easy to root!

There is more...
x = y			if x = y is a true statement then x+49 = y is false, they both can't be true.
x+49 = y		this is a lie because my equation is unbalanced
x+49 = y+49		doing to both sides this makes my equation balanced

Ax2+bx+c = y		this is an area formula we call a quadratic because it has a power of 2.
Ax2+bx+c = y		since y equals f(x) we can write this using function notation
Ax2+bx+c = f(x)	writing it in function notation allows us to graph it as a parabola

Whatever our equation is it acts as a formula for deriving area for a rectangle.
This formula treats it as a square. The standard formula explains what parts do what.
We are using formulas so we can perform geometric transformations.
Transformations means that we are scaling the rectangle by changing inputs of x to create new outputs of area.
The outputs are what the area will be. We call area “y” or “f(x)”.

None of this matters unless we solve for x. Solving for x tells us what input was used to find the area we are given. 
This makes more sense with word problems but need to teach process first.

2nd example:  Both equation give same parabola.  x2 +5x+5 = (x+2.5)2 – 1.25
 
		x2 +5x+5					(x +2.5)2 – 1.25 = 0
 











A grapher you can find points on a parabola by inputting any number for x and solving for y. What you choose for x will be the x value and what you choose for y will be the y value. Finding the x intercepts gives us the square roots for our area. We are very much interested in this information and not the y -intercepts like we were for linear equations. To find roots plug in 0 for y. You can use standard notation or function notation.

Using standard formula ax2+bx+c = y

x2 +5x+5 = y					this says x2 +5x+5 = area
x2 +5x+5 = 0 					this says area = 0
x2 +2.5x+2.5x+ 5 = 0				I changed bx into bx/2 +bx/2 = 2bx/2
x2 +2.5x+2.5x+ 5+2.52 =2.52 			I completed the square by adding (b/2)2 to both sides
x2 +2.5x+2.5x+ 5+2.52 – 2.52    = 0		I cleared area to get standard form again	
(x2 +2.5x+2.5x+2.52) + 5 – 2.52 = 0		I moved  bx/2 into () so I could factor it as a perfect square
(x +2.5)(x +2.5) + 5 – 2.52 = 0			I factored (x2 +2.5x+2.5x+2.52) from a2+2ab+b2 into (a+b)(a+b)
(x +2.5)2 + 5 – 2.52 = 0				I followed exponent rules to write in exponent notation
(x +2.5)2 + 5 – 6.25 = 0			calculate 2.52 mentally using distributive property (25)2 = (25)(5+25)
(x +2.5)2  –1.25 = 0				combine like terms
±√(x +2.5)2  –1.25 = ±√0			take square root of both sides

Because I choose a quotient for a square (25/4) I find it hard to square root this result. Completing the square struggles unless you have a integer square. The quadratic formula can solve this...
x2+5x+5					
– 5±√25 –20/2				(– b±√b2 –4ac)/2a 	everything has to be divided by 2a – b±√b^2 –4ac/2a
– 5±√5/2				x = –5±√5/2	

Quadratic formula was way quicker. As I wrote the problem I squared 5 and wrote as 25 and multiplied 4∙5 and wrote as 20 to save space and time. What was left was 25 – 20 and I was done. It was pretty much a 1 step thing.
Before we show you how to skip steps you need to know what steps you are skipping. I usually the quadratic formula will take about 4 – 5 steps but this was less because I can not simplify the radical any more.

If you want an approximation use a calculator or use 2.23 as √5.

– 5±√5/2
(–5+ 2.23)/2   or (–5–2.23)/2
– 2.77/2         or   – 7.23/2	mentally do this using distributive  7.23/2~ (700/2+23/2) = 350+11.5 = 361.5~ 3.615
–1.385	          or     –3.61      	calculator gives –1.382 or – 3.618 			

Different ways to solve for x with be taught. Every problem requires the right formula for top speed. 
The quadratic formula is only for problems that can not be solved by factoring or completing the square. 
If we use function notation change y to f(x) and 0 to f(0).

1. To solve a quadratic is to take a quadratic equation and solve for the x intercepts (x1,0) and (x2,0)
2. If it can be easily factored use factoring.
3. If it can not be easily factored use factoring by grouping.
4. If it can not be factored at all then it is prime.
5. If it is a prime quadratic and b is an integer use completing the square.
6. Completing the square works best on x2+bx+0 and (x–h)2 = –k.
7. Completing the square is a variation of Al Khwarizmi's identity.
8. Completing the square sets equation to 0 while Khwarizmi's identity sets equation to –k. 
9. If you leave the equation set to zero you completed the square, if you leave the equation set to –k you found Khwarizmi's identity. 
10. If you have a decimal or radical for b use quadratic formula

11. If you use quadratic formula and get a negative square root then you have two imaginary solutions.
12. Imaginary solutions are called “no real root solutions”, depending on problem you might not have an answer.



















Graphing Quadratics 

The first quadratic we study is y = x2. We can easily graph this by hand because it is familiar as a regular power function. Make a table and list table values and then plot by hand using graph paper. It is good to get practice drawing on graph paper. Graph by hand and compare to a computer drawn graph.


 










At a glance we know what the coordinates are of every point. They are the squares and their roots. The x2 term in a quadratic creates the shape of the graph. If we change its coefficient from 1 to more than 1 the graph accelerates, if we change the cof to less than 1 the graph decelerates. This refers to rate of growth. The coefficient A is thought of as “amplification”. If x2 = 9 then we have point (3,9) if 3x2 = 9 then we have point (√3, 9).

The vertical shift is given by “C”. If we have x2 +15 = 40 then x = 5 and we have point (5,40). The C term does not have a variable x so we find manipulating it very easy. We should know all sorts of ways to manipulate c for both linear and quadratics easily.

The horizontal shift is given by Bx. Focus is given on the vertex of a parabola. The vertex is the center point on a quadratic that has many special properties. Changing B causes the vertex to move along an arc trajectory. This makes solving the entire equation necessary to calculate a point. If we have x2+2x the graph shifts down and left. If we have x2 the graph shifts down and right 

We can see that the y axis is hitting the the parabola off center.
The vertex moved from (0,0) left and down to (?,?). 
Find vertex using vertex formula:

       x2+ 2x  =y	 	
       x2+ 2x +1 =1	complete square	
(x+1)(x+1) –1 =0
        (x+1)2–1 =0	vertex formula vertex is (–1,–1)


The vertex formula gives the x,y of the vertex. It is derived using completing the square. 
The vertex formula is a(x+h)2 +k =y or simply a(x–h)2+k. 

Using standard form to shift graph is difficult because it follows parabolic curved ascent path. 
Using vertex formula to shift graph is easy because it moves in straight lines left, right.

K is the vertical shift and x is the horizontal shift. We had (x+1) which implies (x+1) =0 so x = – 1.
I am not going to prove it here but x is always the opposite of h. Since h was 1 x is –1. 
k is directly defined as the height of the vertex. It was –1 so the vertex is ( –1,–1) 

Why (x+h) moves graph left and why (x–h) moves graph right

Claim:		People think that adding to x will move to the right and vice versa but this is not true.
		We are looking for the x value of (x,y) and the value of x is not h but x. 

x ≠ h	duh
x = x	double duh

(x–h) means that x is our horizontal position. If I said y=Mx+b and y = 0 then 0= Mx+b.

y=Mx+b		this says we have a linear equation	
0 =Mx+b		this says a point has a height of 0
–b = Mx		this says a point has a height of –b 
–b=(y/x)x   		this substitutes y/x for M. you can do this because M =y/x
–b=(y/0)x		this says we have undefined slope
–b=x			this says every point on a vertical line has an x value of  –b   
b = x			this says since b can be positive or negative the minus sign is extraneous
a = x			this says lets use a instead of –b because it is simpler and less confusing

The equation for a vertical line is x=a. The equation for a horizontal line is y=a. For any vertical line x=a;

x = a		this says we have a vertical line 
x = 4		this says every point of our line has an x value of 4 given by (4,y)
x –4=0		this says that x is still 4 because “math” ■
 
Using the vertex formula changes x = a to x –a. We inverted the formula so that's why the signs are reversed. 

I don't think people understand what domain of x means. Technically it is the possible choices for x. 
If x has domain (–∞,∞) then its domain is infinite. How do we limit the domain? There are ways... we could use set notation and create inequalities or similar. Okay but how do we increase the domain of x? 
Is that even possible? Probably. If string theory and physics can do it then pure math definitely can. 
There are two points of view. One group says you can the other says you can't because infinity is not a number but a concept. What the group who say you can't fails to understand is a that concepts only exist because we allow it to. We could try silly things like ∞+1>∞ but is better to start with natural questions. 
How big is the universe? 

Both groups would agree that it is infinite but then disagree on what infinite means. As a number too big to count, as a concept a number that keeps adding plus one over and over again. The universe is expanding at the speed of light growing all the time.  This causes math to break down. The fastest something can travel is the speed  of light and the universe seems to expand at the furthest reaches at a speed faster than light. So our understanding of math at the edge of the universe is dubious. There could be different laws of math for different parts of the universe. Lets start with something smaller first, the domain of x.

In math talk we limit the reals to the positive numbers but restricting the domain of x using {x| xεr:0,∞}.
“For x, x is a member of the reals of domain zero to infinity”.
How big is 0 to ∞? Infinity. If we eliminated all negative numbers to get (0,∞) how big is –∞ to ∞? 
Twice as big as the first infinity.

What if we did (1,∞) how big is that? 1 smaller than the first. So you mean to say that is ∞ – 1? In a sense yes.
Its as if we started with (0,∞) as an infinite line and then shortened it by 1. If our line started at (0,0) because of
“–1” if now starts at (1,0). Subtracting 1 shortens the line. If we had (0,0) and did “+1” we would start as (–1,0). 
In short vertex formula uses inverses to start the starting point of a line called “vertex” that has a length of 0.  
“You can not use ∞ that way! Abuse!” Fine use a line from 0 to 100 and then 1 to 100.  From (0,0) adding 1 to x means starting at (1,0) instead of (0,0). And so a line will be 1 unit shorter by using the notation we do in set theory. Specifically for a parabola our x is y = x2. We can choose signed numbers but use 0 and get the point (0,0) which is convenient. Having x2 +bx does tricky things due to the directrix and focus needing to maintain ratio constraints forcing our vertex point, which we will call P, to move in a orbital fashion. Through algebra we write the equation as the form we derived through completing the square. As luck would have it this form gives the x,y of the vertex in clear terms. K gives height and x gives base from y axis. Remember we are scaling rectangles. The parabola is the corner points of newly formed rectangles.




Every point on a parabola has the y value represent area for a rectangle.
A square is made with x2. Adding/subtracting bx horizontally stretches or squishes the square.
x2 +bx is a binomial quadratic that is the sum of 2 products. The products are the area of square and a rectangle.
Changing bx changes the width of the rectangle




These are overlapping rectangles.
They have the same area but are scaled.
The pattern resembles a step function.
As x increases each new step is higher.
Rate increase with each higher step.
We call this acceleration.




When you put two together a curve like parabola shape emerges. 
Having infinite points would produce a perfectly smooth parabola.

When a new rectangle is formed the base shortens forcing the height to increase to maintain area.
Writing a formula sets the rules for how rectangles are to be scaled. Every new rectangle creates a higher corner that can approximate a parabola. This is an intuitive explanation. Shapes are covered precisely in conic sections.

A rectangle can be dragged and scaled using a paint program. 
Try seeing what patterns you can make using cad or other software.
.  


The discriminant b2 – 4ac

The discriminant is the part of the quadratic formula that contains the square root “(– b±√b2 – 4ac)/2a”.
The discriminant is used to tell how many solutions a quadratic equation has before trying to solve it.

Discriminant
Nature of roots
b2 – 4ac > = 0	
If square root is positive then you have two solutions. Vertex is below x axis.
b2 – 4ac > = 0
If square root is 0 then you have one solution. Vertex is on x axis.
b2 – 4ac < = 0
If square root is negative then you have two imaginary solutions. Vertex is above x axis.

Discriminant
Nature of roots
b2 – 4ac > = 0	
Two real roots. If perfect square roots are rational, if not perfect roots are irrational conjugates.
b2 – 4ac > = 0
One real root that is a rational number with vertex on the x axis.
b2 – 4ac < = 0
Two imaginary roots that are complex conjugates.

Later the determinant and discriminant are used to solve matrices so learning these words now helps memorize the quadratic formula as having b/2a and b2 –4ac in them.  


x2 and (–x)2 produce the same graphs but – x2 inverts it.	          Changing bx causes vertex to move along orbit.

The vertex moves along this inverted path making calculating its trajectory much harder than with the vertex formula. Notice that the vertex is the lowest point on x2 and the highest point on –x2. This is why it follows the path it does, it is following a mirror reflection, or shadow of itself.  	

The vertex is always the middle of the graph, when it moves all points move, zero shift puts it on the y axis, positive shift move it to the left because we are adding to its domain, negative shift moves it to the right because we are taking away from domain. The domain of x while equation is set to a constant is always a single constant.
The graph used was x2 +4x –4. In vertex formula (x+2)2 –4. This tells us the vertex is ( –2, –4).  
 
x2 +2x	 = (x+1)2 –1	and     x2+4x 	= (x+2)2  –4 

Both are horizontal shifts of x2.
Both have positive discriminates so have two solutions.

The quadratic formula tells you what your roots are.
The discriminant says how many and what type of roots.
Completing the circle converts into vertex form.

Vertex form allows for easy graphing and tells location of the vertex. 		
When the we have x2 we have one real root at (0,0). 
When we have (x +2)2 – 4 we have two roots at (–2,0) and (0,0).
The root (–2,0) is because domain was shifted with (x+2)2.
Using the quadratic formula tells us that roots are x = –1±1 so we get two roots at –2 and 0. 



This is a “family” of parabolas.
They have the same patterns.
The only difference is the bx term.
The vertex follows an orbital trajectory of – x2
–x2 is the “shadow” of x2.


x2 is the “parent” function for this family of  quadratic equations.  

Every parabola of the form 1x2 +bx+0 will shift on the inverted red parabola. 
Every parabola of the form Ax2 +bx+0 will shift on –Ax2.

This is taught in conics or later pre calculus but I am telling you now.
Otherwise you will not have any intuition and will not understand what you are graphing. 



Inverting the operation sign of bx reflects graph.
This is x2 –bx the last one was x2+bx.

The most complicated part of a quadratic is bx.
Now we understand all three parts
A,B,C are coefficients that:

A amplifies the graph, B shifts the graph orbitally, C shifts vertically.
X2  squares an input, x adds or subtract from the base of a rectangle, x0 does nothing.

Ax2+Bx+C can be written as ax2+bx+c.  We have three coefficients of x so have three x terms except x0 cancels.    













We take domain of physical length to be to be of the interval {[0,∞)}.
x+2 adds to this domain so that domain is 2 units longer. We now have domain {[–2,∞)}.
Please do not confuse domain with a point even though it uses () notation. 
If domain is longer we start at – 2 and move to infinity instead of starting at 0. This makes domain 2 units longer.

Quartics and other higher power quadratics 

Equation type
Form
Illustration
Degree
Linear
y = mx+b
y = ½x+5
1
Quadratic
ax2+bx+c
3x2–12x+48 
2
Cubic
ax3+bx2+cx+d
2x3–4x2+5x–2 
3
Quartic
ax4+bx3+cx2+dx+f
–7x4+6x3+5x2+4x+3
4
Quintic
ax5+bx4+cx3+dx2+fx+g
2x5+0x4+0x3+2x2+7x+3
5
Sextic
ax6+bx5+cx4+dx3+fx2+gx+h
x6+2x5–3x4+5x3+x2+2x+4
6
Septic
ax7+bx6+cx5+dx4+fx3+gx2+i
4x7+171
7
Octic
...pattern repeats

8
Nonatic
...pattern repeats

9
Dexatic 
...pattern repeats

10

These are polynomials of high powers. A polynomial can be any power. It can have missing terms. 
We do not write missing terms unless doing division and need it as a place holder.
When terms are missing the coefficient for that term is 0. 

A quartic is when you multiply a quadratic by another quadratic. x2∙x2 = x4. x4 is a quartic. 
Some quartics can be reduced to a quadratic. x4 – 9x2+8 is in quadratic form because it is reducible to quadratic.  

During polynomial we said that one term was a monomial, two was a binomial, three was a trinomial.
We didn't have names for four or more terms. This only considered itself with amount of terms not their powers.
x4 – 9x2+8 is a trinomial but is degree 4.

We can make a quadratic by multiplying two linear x: 2x∙x = 2x2
We can make a cubic by multiplying a linear x and a quadratic x: 2x2∙x = 2x2
We can make a quartic by multiplying a linear x and a cubic or multiplexing two quadratics: 2x2∙x2.

We have a function x4 – 9x2 + 8 shown in two pictures. The first shows its minima to be about (±9,1632.25).
The second picture maxima to be infinite but have a relative maxima at (0,8).  

Solve:x4 – 9x2+8 = 0			Check:

(x2)2 – 9(x2) +8	   = 0			For ±√8			For ±1				
(u)2 – 9(u) +8	   = 0				
(u – 8)(u –1)	   = 0			x4+ –9x2       +8  = 0		 x4 – 9x2	  +8 = 0	
u = 8 or 1			     (±√8)4+ –9(±√8)2 +8 = 0		(±–1)4 – 9(±–1)2+8 = 0
x2 = 8 or 1			          64 –72 + 8           = 0 		1 – 9 +8 	       = 0
x = ±2√2 or ±√1			
					Solution set: (–1, 1, –2√2, 2√2)
You can also solve  x4 – 9x2+8 = 0 by factoring but is not always easy.

x4 – 9x2+8 = 0
(x2 –1)(x2 – 8) = 0
x = ±1   or x = ±2√2

If a higher powered function can be reduced to a quadratic then we can use the quadratic formula to solve. 
There is a formula for cubics but is very long and there is on for quartics but it is not recommended. 
Simple things are solved by algebra. Hard things are solved by calculator.
You might have to rewrite a function using algebra to reduce it and then solve it by either a calculator or by hand using the quadratic formula.


This is everything about quadratics except for inequalities, practice problems, and application problems.
Word problems and college assessment tests are in the back for practice. Word problems give detailed examples how to use quadratic in real life as opposed to testing whether you can do the technique or not.



x2= 49

√x2= ±√49
x = ±7

49 = x*x
49=7*7
49= – 7* – 7






Polynomial exponentials
Polynomial radicals 
    

x2+5x+6     = 0
(x+2)(x+3) = 0


–2+2(–2+3 )=0

–3+2 (– 3+3) =0  









Exponential functions f(x) = ax

Exponential functions take a base and expand it by the power of x. This is like counting by powers of your base.
The “a” is a given constant for base while “x” is your unknown that varies. I don't have much to say because there isn't much going on with these except working up to logarithms. Hate to rely on tables but have no choice. 

f(x) = 2x
x
y
point
2-6
0.015625
( –6, 0.015625)
2-3
0.125
( –3, 0.125)
2-2
0.25
( –2, 0.25)
2-1
0.5
( –2, 0.5)
20
1
(0, 2)
21
2
(1, 2)
22
4
(2, 4)
23
8
(2,8)

Input is the exponent and output is powers of whatever a is, in this case 2.
Since negative powers of base 2 is division by 2 what the negative exponents are is the imperial fraction system.
Positive powers of 2 will give outputs as “powers of 2” … (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32...).
Exponential functions can not have a negative valuve for y unless using a negative vertical shift (very unorthodox/possible).
Exponents in general can never give a negative product because they can never reach zero under Zeno's paradox.
 As a rule a>0 because 1x doesn't grow and –ax produces imaginary numbers as square roots. 



Exponential functions are used in charts to show business or science information like exponential growth, sales, diesease outbreaks, etc. Exponential functions take off to infinity very quick and are used to teach unbounded behavior. Classic uses are calculating interest, atomic power, deer or other population like bacteria,

If a is < 1 then we have exponential decay. Classic use half life of plutonium, shrinking deer population, depreciation value. The last example is used heavily in business expensing cycles on the option to buy equipment or rent, to captialize (borrow money) or expense (buy outright).

The inverse of exponentials is logarithms which is more interesting. Exponential functions are boring to tears, unless making a nuclear bomb or something and you need to know what how powereful in megatons a blast will be. They are just to easy. They may be used in statistics as a minor part of math being heavily over shadowed by chi square tests, double regression, poisson distributions and other more elaborate methods.

f(x) =2x

The function can never get below the x axis unless you transform the graph with something like 2x –1.

Classic features are a asymtote at x axis and graph taking off as powers increase.

Exponents and logarithms are inverses of each other.


Logarithmic Functions loga(x)

Mostly functions are just operations + – ∙ ÷ ^ √. We know how to do operations and use function notation.
An equation in algebra is called a function. A function is an operation. All equations are functions.

Domain is the number line. Without domain we would not have a number line. Without functions we would not have operations. I do not know any math that can operate without operations or a number line.

Inverses reverse the order of operations performed so that you can find initial values.

1. Write function:	f(x) = x+2	
2. Replace f(x) with y:	y = x+2	
3. interchange x and y:  	x = y+2	
4. Solve for y:	          	x – 2 = y		
5. Replace y with f-1(x):  f-1(x) = x – 2		I write f(y) = y – 2 its not confusing, just input your output 

x axis inputs are products and y axis outputs are roots.


Exponential function take roots and turn them into products.
Logs take products and reveal the exponent of the base.

Like radicals, logs are the most counterintuitive function.
They are written very different from other equations.


The points are (x,y) equal (product,exponent) but  we want to find the exponent and not the root. 
For “ay =x” we are looking for the exponent “y”. The base number raised to a power of y equals our input.
We know the radicand and the root but we do not know the index. We are looking for the exponent.


x = the product 	y = the exponent 	a= the base 

1. Loga(x) = y	Logbase(input)= output		Log10(1000) = 3
2. alog_a(x) = y 	ay = x

Q: What power of 2 equals 256? 	Q: What power of e equals 2.718281828?   	Q: What power of 10 = 1000?
A: 16					A: 1	a					A:3
    f(x):   log2(256)			f(x):    loge(2.718...)  or ln(2.718...)		f(x):  log10(1000)
        y = log2(256)			    y = loge(2.718...)				   y = log10(1000)
    f(x) = log2(256)			f(x) = log2(2.718)			           f(x) = log10(1000)
f(256) = 16(25		 	   f(2.718...) = 1					           f(x) = 3


You can use base 10, base e or any number for base. Base e is the “natural logarithm” and stands for exponetial or “Euler's number”.

Using a calculator:
1. Pick a base
2. Input a product
3. hit enter to find the expont that raises your base to the product you entered

Logrithms are not quite rooting operations. When you root a number you know the exponent and need the base. Here we know the base and need the exponent. 

The rules for logarithms are the same as for exponents except they are written in a funny notation.

Log Rule
Notation
Example
Product
Logamn = logam+logan
log2(3∙4)=log23+log24
Power
Loga mp = p∙logam
Log101002 = 2log10100
Quotient
Logam/n = logam –logan
Log5125/25 = log53 – log52
Base to a power 
Logaak = k
Log153.79 = 9
Change of base 
Logam = logam/logan
Log⅔17 =  log1017/log10⅔
Log⅔17 =  loge17/loge⅔

Logs were invented in 15?? By John Napier as a way to perform multiplication by adding.
At that time log tables were used to lookup values. Now we use calculators.
Old calculators only had base 10 and base e but now allow for any base.

Base ten is like scientific notation. It is called the “common log”.
Base e is a universal constant for growth. It is called “the natural log”.
Base e is written as ln instead of loge. This is used in calculus. In fact logrithms are used heavily in calculus.
The constant e is irrational and is approximately 2.718281828. The numbers are easy to remember.

The Bernoullis student Euler invented the formula for continously compounded interest for King Konig.

Compounded n times
Formula for interest A(n) = (1+1/n)n
1     annually
2     bi-annually
4      quarterly
12    monthly
365   daily
8760  hourly
∞
2
2.25
2.44140625
2.61303529
2.714567482
2.718126692
e ≈ 2.71828182884



Other formulas 
Interest compounded continuously
P(t) = Pert where P is principal
Exponential growth
p(t)=Pert
Exponential decay
p(t)=Pe-rt
Carbon dating
P(t)= Pe-0.00012t







Graphing Quadratic Basics

I want to graph all functions from linear equations and work up to cubics so you actually can do this if you need to. 

We will graph:

1. a point on the number line
2. a linear equation in 		either 	y = mx+b 		or 	ax+by=c
3. a quadratic in 			either 	ax2+bx+c		or 	a(x–h)2 + k
4. a cubic in 			either 	ax3+bx2 +cx +d  	or 	a(x–h)3 + k

The number line

The number line is the x axis. The x axis contains all real numbers and is therefore called the real number line.
The number line, and any points on it, is called “the graph” of the solution to the arithmetic problem at hand.
The number line is used to introduce counting concepts.

Graph 2+7=9 and 2∙4.5 =9: Both graphs are same showing start at 2 and end at 9 but does not say what operation to use.


That information has to be found from the equation or assumed based on context. 
In general operation does not matter so long as we have the right end number. This implies early math or linear algebra.
Set theory uses number line graphs to solve inequalities. Hollow circles are “undefined” and solid circles are “defined”.
Hollow is the starting position and solid is the ending position. This shows what direction an operation is moving a number. 

Increasing  uses this symbol “⊶” to show a left to right movement. 
Decreasing uses this symbol “⊷” to show a right to left movement.

Any arithmetic problem can be graphed on a number line. Later we use number lines to explain the continum and the cardinality of the sets over the reals. We use the number line to help solve complicated proofs.

Number lines are used for equations that have zero dimensions of x. 
We call numbers like this “scalars” because they “scale” by multiplication.
Scalars are a study of linear algebra. Scalars are introduced in trigonmetry when studying vectors.

The graph above is taken to mean 2→9 which is “2 becomes 9”. This should not be confused with inequalities that have identical graph for  2<x≤9 which is “two is less than x is less than or equal to nine.”

If 2+7 = 9 then x = 9. This is the convention we will use. Oddly 9 = 9x0 so we say there is zero dimensions of x.

We are not measuring a length we are giving a location of “9” on the number line.
We we were measuring a length the length would not be 9 it would be 9 –2 or “7”. 

Since we do not have a line but a location we call that location a “dot” or a “point”. 
In geometry two points form a line. The length of a point from 2 to 9 would be 7 units.
This would be the first appearance of x1 where 7 “units” means 7x and “7” is scaling that “x”.

This is used for physical measurements and physics. In physics formulas use complicated units like seconds squared.

The Cartesian Graph

We call any rectangular grid with two axes a “Cartesian graph” to honor the inventor Rene descartes. 
We say x,y chart or x,y graph for short. In business they tend to say “chart” in academics they say “graph”.

Starting with the x axis we create a second axis called the y axis.
The y axis is rotated 90° perpendicular to the x axis.  They intersect at the point (0,0) which is called the origin.
An x,y graph shows a relation between two quantities, this relationship is called a ratio. 
A ratio states a proportion between two elements in numerical terms.
Specifically we have the notation x:y which is also y/x. You will remember this as slope and later as tangent.

On Live with Kelly and Ryan we have two TV personalities who are very much interested in charts.
Kelly is concerned with “Neilsen Ratings” and Ryan is concerned with “Billboards Top 100 Chart”.
These charts and understanding them are critical to what they do. I am sure after every show Kelly asks her producer what the ratings are and he either calculates the data directly or has a guy for that. Ryan hosts Coast To Coast With Ryan Seacrest where he has to play what is poppular or he too will suffer from rating loss. In business they call them charts. Scientists who do research and make new chemicals and materials call them graphs.

Understanding math is vital to understanding the world you live in. Based on your interpretation of a graph and what it “trends” will influence your reaction to that data. The internet has trends which are nothing more than data miners combing through aggreagate data to find what is most popular. Depending on how they interpret the data their predictions will either be right or wrong. Stock brokers and hedge fund managers do similar.

These so-called trends are nothing more than a ratio of y to x. A trend in math is the direction of a function and its slope. If a graph is positive or negative and what speed it is accelerating. The graphs we explore are complicated having smooth continous curves. The graphs business and other examples I described are dealing with are primitive discrete functions rather than continous functions. Discrete functions have sharp points that show highs and lows. These points are when a function changes direction and either trends to the positive or trends to the negative. All through out basic math and pre-algebra kids are shown these types of graphs and asked to interpret them in hopes of getting them ready for a basic career in dealing with simple graphs but not really being a professional mathematician or scientist. Maybe some type of soft scientist like climate and weather research that deals with data tracking.

Ratios use symmetry to find a result. From this point forward all math will leverage symmetry using ratios.

The Cartesian graph is a breakthrough in math. It allows the solving of problems algebraically that previously could only be solved through geometry and triangle based geometric ratios.  When we graph a line using standard or any other form we are trying to solve the sides of a triangle. We are trying to solve a triangle, before you needed geometry to do that. If we wanted to dumb it down we could say that ratios are simply one side of a triangle divided by the other side of a triangle, and this is true for all ratios. That's all it is.

In the beginning  there was only the number line. It was used to solve arithmetic + – ×÷. 
This is stated quite well in Euclid's Geometry. People Followed his methods until  Descartes.

The Greek method was to divide lines and compare then as ratios. They only discovered radicals from trying to construct altars to Greek god... they needed to divide a square diagonally that had integer sides. We know this always creates a triangle with an irrational hypotenuse until you have a pythagorean triple. Beliving irrationals were evil they were desperate to find these triples that had integers for all sides. This lead to the Pythagoras Theorem and the rest is history.






Greek Methods


Division by 2 was done using the square. Other fractions divided a line into ratios. Shown is 1:1, 1:2, 1:3.

A 1:1 ratio is ½ 
A 1:2 ratio is ⅓ which if the line was read the other way or flipped around making a 2:1 ratio for ⅔ 
A 1:3 ratio is ¼ which if flipped around 3:1 for a fraction of ¾ 

Ratios are and are not fractions. Before we can study slope M = y/x  or  x:y we need to understand ratios.

A 1:1 ratio is not the fraction 1/1. If I have a candy bar and break it two equal parts then I have ½ + ½ = 1 candy bar.
Each half is ½ as a fraction and 50% as a percentage. 50% + 50% = 100%

Another example: ½  of $1 = $0.50. If I have two fifty cent pieces I have a 1:1 ratio or 50 cents to 50 cents.

A percent is “per” meaning divide and “cent” meaning Latin for 100. 
Many English words for 100 have the Latin root “cent”. 

When we take a fraction or percent we are trying to add to 100% of something. 100% always equals the decimal “1.0”.
In practical use a percentage is rate of something, it is a fraction of “1”, and we are using a function to find a total based off that rate.

10% of 100 is 10. This means 10 out of 100 once.		10%(100) = 0.1∙100 = 10  but also 10∙1 = 10 
10% of 150 is 15. This means 10 out of 100 1.5 times.	10%(150) = 0.1∙150 = 10  but also  10∙1.5 = 15	

Standard math uses the first equation 0.1∙150 but the intuition is the second equation 10∙1.5 = 15. 
I have (1+½) groups of 100. This was the original definition and understanding.

We use modern methods to calculate because they are faster but original methods to comprehend what we are doing.
Older methods show what is happening but are too clumsy and slow to use for fast results.

We already showed how to use y=mx+b to graph a linear equation. If y = ⅓x +4 the slope is the fraction ⅓.


x = 3, y = 1. For every 3 units to the right we move one unit up. We have 3 parts x to 1 part y. Normally a ratio would say we have 4 parts and that x = ¾ and y = ¼ but that is not how we calculate slope as a fraction or ratio.

Here a fraction is a ratio because we are creating a strange proportion.

Instead of y = ⅓x +4 lets use  y = ⅓x +0:

y = ⅓x
3y = 1x
1x = 3y
1:3	for x:y		

It is strange that we directly took our ratio as the fraction. 
This will not happen in other parts of math and will cause confusion.
If I have ⅔ of a candy bar and you have ⅓, what is the ratio? Write as me being x and you being y:

2:1		This says I have 2 parts and you have 1 part for a total of 3 parts. This is same as above.

Ratios are not taught at the pre algebra level. Elementary school grades 3 to 5 teach fractions, decimal, and percents but not until algebra are they involved and even then the teaching is weak. Then in trigonmetry the entire course is ratios called sin, cosine,, and tangent, and that is reduced to division and not really dealing with ratios on a pure level but rather what function to use to solve a triangle.

They say that people hate or even afraid of fractions, decimals, and percentages but those are all very simple. Only ratios are hard because they require better understanding and exposure it limited. The problem is that from algebra to geometry to trig to statistics to calculus everything is a ratio. Previously it wasn't, it was a mere sum. Just an answer to derive from an equation. Success at this point requires proficientcy in dealing with and thinking in terms of ratios  and mastery off all basics. The fear is ratios will be neglected and failure will result. 

Every single word problem in algebra deals with a ratio. The problem is translated into math using a linear or other type equation. The problems will state a two different rates of constant change where they equalize at a single point. 

A proportion is a combination of two ingredients to make a whole. I want a bag of mixed nuts. Each bag contain 3 cashews and 5 peanuts. I have 8 nuts total. My ratio of cashews to peanuts is 3:5. The cashews are ⅜ of the bag or 37.5%.
If this ratio of 3:5 means the fractions ⅜+⅝ = 1 bag how come in slope a 3:1 ratio is the fraction ⅓? Something different is happening here with our “ratio” for slope. Something somewhere is being canceled.

3 cashews = 5 peanuts	
y = ⅓x
3c =5p	
3y = 1x
1 =1.6
1x = 3y
1:1.6      for cashews:peanuts
1:3	for x:y	
We get a fraction of ⅗ for a ratio 
We get a fraction of 3/1 for a ratio  
This say I have 60% more peanuts than cashews

Its not saying it's anything about worth

Do not think “one of these is equal to one of those, so it is worth this much more than the other”
It is stating quantity not quality
This is saying I have 300% more x than y

A slope of ⅓ means x is 3 times bigger than y.
If   1/3 = y/x  then x is “winning 3 to 1”


	
A fraction is a piece of a whole. 
Add two fraction to get 1.0:    ⅓+⅔ = 1							This is logical.

A ratio states how much bigger one piece is than another.  
We do not add ratios:  ⅓+3/1 = 3.3. 								This result is nonsense.

The amount of cashews is ⅜ of the bag and the peanuts is ⅝... ⅜+⅝ = 1.				correct
The ratio of cashews to peanuts is ⅗, the ratio of peanuts to cashews is 5/3... ⅗+5/3 = 2.26  		mistake

Do not add ratios. 
Note that the fractions have same denominator and is equal to the sum of their numerators.
Note that the ratios are reciprocals that will multiply to 1.

We want to harness this symmetry of ratios to solve word problems using algebra by treating items like triangle sides.
x,y graph linear equations

The x,y graph charts the progress of distance and height to see what is winning, dominating, or overtaking the other. 
It is a battle of ratios which team has the stronger values, team x or team y.

If y is winning we have a steep slope. If x is winning we have a shallow slope.

If x becomes 0 then y automatically wins because x dropped out. Slope will be infinite and not calculable, kinda bad.
This gives the equation for a vertical line x=a where a is a constant and there is no y component. Odd but true.

If y becomes 0 then x automatically wins because y dropped out. Slope will be 0 which is none at all. Easiest to calculate. 
This gives the equation for a horizontal line y=b where b is a constant and there is no y component. Odd but true.

Everything is math has an opposite. That is why I copy and paste so much. I could write denser to avoid rivers of white but it would be harder to learn that way.

We start with word problems for business and engineering. We use the standard form ax+by = c. 
In all of our formulas abc our coefficients and xyz are varibles. 
This makes learning new formulas easy because we are following an agreed upon convention.

ax+by = c is related to rational expressions. Rational expressions are when we divide polynomals like (x+1)/(x+4).
ax+by = c  when you have two points on a line and need to find slope or have one point and slope and need to find another point. It works very well for total value and mixture problems. It takes work using standard form to find the y intercept.

3x -4y = 12		ignore 3x
– 4y = 12
y = –3			the intercept is (0, –3) We can not ignore 3x but realise it cancels when we plug in 0 for it. 

y = mx+b is used for graphing because it gives the y intercept. Rewrite standard form into intercept form:

3x -4y = 12			write in standard form
–4y      = 12 –3x		subtract x from both sides to move it to the right side	
– 4y     = – 3x + 12		reorder x in front of “b”
y          = ¾x –3   		divide all terms by coefficient of y
y = ¾x – 3			this gives the intercept as b
 
Point slope intercept form y – y1 = m(x – x1)

This is used when looking at a graph. You find a point and then count to another point to get two points. 
Use the formula for slope to find slope. If you have slope and two points you have all information to write any of the formulas. If you are missing one piece of information you can derive the third piece needed to write any of the forms. You need either two points or slope and one point ot write a linear equation.

Slope is given by the formula M = y –y1/x – x1 . We can convert this into point formula by canceling.

M = y –y1/x – x1			formula for slope

(x – x1)(y –y1/x – x1 )=M(x – x1)        	multiplying x – x1 on both side to cancel 

y – y1 = M(x – x1)			point slope formula
Graph a linear equation using the three forms

Standard form: 3x -4y = 12

This would be hard to graph intially but we can find the y intercept by substituting 0 for x.

If x = 0 then y = – 3. This is our intercept. We then do multiple substitutions for x to find more points. This is easily done using a table but not mentally. It would be best to convert to intercept form since that would be easy to do mentally.

Regardless if we want to keep equation in standard for then create a table for x and put in values to solve for y.
Since we are using standard form it implies we want integer point values for both x and y but not always.

Write your function or equation here:                                                 3x -4y = 12        
Write x values in this column: x
Write y values in this column: y
Optional write points here: (x,y)
0
3(0) -4y = –3 
(0,– 3)
1
3(1) -4y = 12
(1,– 2.25)
2
3(2) -4y = 12
(2,– 1.5)
3
3(3) -4y = 12
(3,– 0.75)
4
3(4) -4y = 12
(4,– 0)
  
we want to start with the y intercept by making x = 0 because that is important point and easy to calculate.
After that we use integer values for x 1,2,3...
For harder problems you will need to include negative values for x but will still solve for  x=0 first.
When doing this you can write 0 in the middle of your column, then find and y values when x >0, then go back and work the opposite direction and find all y values when x<0. You may also need to use fractions or decimals for inputs.

                                   3x -4y = 12        
 x
y
(x,y)
– 4
Do the positive points first then come back and do the negative points.
Start at x = –1 then work away from x = 0.
When you have all the values you want to graph plot the on graph paper.
Once points are plotted connect them with a line using a pencil and ruler.
It takes two points to make a line but using three points, one in the middle, is best. Three points makes drawing the line straighter so you do not off track by drawing a line off the center of one of your points.
(x,y)
– 3

(x,y)
– 2

(x,y)
– 1

(x,y)
0
–3   
(0,–3)
1
 –2.25
(1,–2.25)
2
–1.5
(2,–1.5)
3
  –0.75
(3,–0.75)
4
0 
(4, 0)

Graph in intercept form: y = Mx+b

Make a list of points by substituting for x, multiplying x with M, then adding b. This can be done mentally to find a few quick points. No need to rewrite your equation or even make a table but a table is a good place to put values so it is still a good idea. With standard form we use the table more to solve, with intercept form we use the table more to write down what we already know or can easily guess. Solve for the intercept first and then the rest of your points.
Graph using point form


Slope is found using two points. 
We subtract the first y from the second y getting  one “y”. 
We subtract the first x from the second y getting  one “x”. 

We divide y/x can call it “slope”. We use the variable M for slope.
M = slope = rise/run = y1 – y/x1 – x .


When slope is negative the line moves up as x increases.
When slope is negative the line moves down as x increases.





Any two points can be used to find slope. If you subract them in the opposite order you x and y will both be negative but both negative signs cancel when you divide giving you the same slope as long as you subtract matching x divided by matchinng y and do not switch and x or y with the other point:

This works: y1 – y/x1 – x.		I put both y1 and x1 first.	(x1 – x, y1 – y)     	        ( x1 is first , y1 is first)
This works: y – y1/x – x1.		I put both y1 and x1 second.	(x – x1, y – y1)	    	        (x1 is second, y1 is second) 

This doesn't work: y1 – y/x – x1.	I did not put both y1 and x1 first.     Wrong pairing (x1 – x, y – y1)	(x1 is 1st,y1 is 2nd)
This doesn't work: y – y1/x1 – x.	I did not put both y1 and x1 second. Wrong pairing (x – x1, y1 – y)	(x1 is 2nd,y1 is 1st) 

Find a location on a line call it “point 1” or “p1” then find another location on the line and call it “point 2” or “p2”.
Write your points as (x1 , y1) for point 1 and (x2 , y2) for point 2 or (x1 , y1) and (x , y).

If you write (x1 , y1) and (x , y) it doesn't matter which one is actually (point 1).

Subtract both x and both y then  divide y over x to get y/x for slope.  
If you have slope from these two points substituting a differeny x will give a different y.
Using a point with a 0 value helps but not necessary.

For 3x – 4y = 12 we had the points (2, – 1.5) and  (3, – 0.75). Find slope:

(2–3, –1.5––0.75) = (–1,–0.75) 	giving x = –1 and y = –0.75 	and so y/x =   –0.75/–1  = ¾ . Slope is M = ¾ .

That was messy because we had to subtract a negtive to add it. I wrote the subtraction operations in () like it was a point because it actually is. Point ( –1, – 0.75) is on the line 3x – 4y =12. If we subtracted in the other way we would have gotten 0.75/1 instead of –0.75/–1 which is the same as ¾ for both.

Slope is ¾ . Because ¾ is positive we have positive slope.Positive slope means the line rises as we move to the right. 
If slope was – ¾ the line would move down as we went to the right. Perrhaps I should have assigned my points in a different order for better efficientcy.

Whatever form you have graphing is done by making a table and choosing inputs for x and then using them to solve for y to make ordered pairs. These pairs represent points ot be plotted on a graph. A graph is the collection of all points that exist that make a continous line, curve or piecewise function.

To write in point form:

(y –y1)             /(x – x1) = M			formula for slope
(– 1.5 – (–.75))/(2–3)     = ¾ 			substituting our slope and points	
 – 1.5 – (–.75)          	    = ¾(2 – 3) 		canceling (x1 – x) on the left side by multiplying it on both sides		
y– (–.75)         		    = ¾(x – 3) 		substituting (x,y) for one of the points, (2, – 1.5)

y +0.75          		    = ¾(x – 3) 		removing () this is our final equation in point form
y – (±y)		    = ¾(x – 3)		our y value can be negative of positive so there can be sign conflict

note: If we used the other point we would have gotten “ – 1.5 – y” where “y” is positive.  –1.5 – y = y – (–1.5).
You are subtracting a positive y. Somehow we would end up with subtrating a negative y and that confuses things.
4 – 3			both numbers are positive
–3 – 4 			only the – 3 is negative
3 – 4			both are positive, we need this... (–1.5) – (y)  the operation sign is negative and y must be positive.

(–1.5) – (y)		put in () and exclude the minus sign from y. Now reorder so that y is in front.
(y) – ( –1.5)		this is correct 
(–1.5) [–] (y) = (y) [–] (–1.5)		→	y – (–1.5)	= – 1.5 – y	

y +0.75= ¾(x-3) is the point form for 3x+4y = 12. This form is used when you only find two points far from the y axis and need these points and slope to find the y intercept.Like if you had to subtract points that were in the dozens or hundreds. Or if you are close to the y axis but have points that are decimal or fractional or even radical like in trig or calculus, this form would help.

Example1: find y intercept		

y +0.75= ¾(x-3)			substitue a 0 for x
y +0.75= ¾(0-3)			
y +0.75= ¾(-3)
y +0.75= – 9/4
y = – 9/4 – 3/4
y = –12/4 = – 3				the y intecept is (0, – 3) 

Example2: find x intercept

y +0.75= ¾(x-3)			substitue a 0 for y
0 +0.75= ¾(x-3)			
0.75= ¾(x-3)				distribute ¾(x – 3) =    (¾ ∙ x) + (¾ ∙ –3) 
0.75= ¾x – 9/4
0.75 +9/4 = ¾x				combine constants 
12/4 ÷( ¾ ) = ¾ x ÷( ¾  )		isolate x by dividing both sides by ¾ 
4 = x					the x intercept is (4,0)

There are speed tricks for dividing by a fraction. Here both denominators are the same so the cancel: 12/4/3/4 = 12/3 = 4.
Complex fractions have fraction in the numerator or denominator. They are a study of rational expressions.

Example3: You need two points to find slope. If you have slope then two points should be known.
	       If you take slope and only one of the know points you can solve for any point:

y –y1 =M(x – x1)		formula for slope
y +0.75 = ¾(x–3)		our slope and one point from before		
y +0.75 = ¾(82–3)		we want to know what (x,y) is when x = 82
y +0.75 = ¾(79)		¾(79) = (3∙79)/4... 
y = 59.25			when x = 82 y = 59.25 giving point (82, 59.25)				

...using distribution 3(79)/4 = (3(80 – 1))/4		we can split 3(79)   into   3(80 –1) then 80+80+80 – 3 = 237
237/4							we can split 237/4   into  (200/4) +  (37)/4  = 50+9.25 = 59.25  

Sometimes distribution is faster mental process and sometimes regular math is faster.
We show examples of property laws on easy examples so that you will know how to use them on  hard problems later.

This could have been solved normally mentally. 3∙79 = 3∙9 + 3∙70 = 27 + 210 = 237
Even with “regular math” we still are using the distribution process. This is the same process as long multiplication.
	  2
	 79 		        First multiply 3∙9, get 27, write 7, then carry the 2.	
	× 3 
	   7
	  2
	 79 		        Then multiply 3∙70, get 210, add the 2 to the tens place, then write 23 infront of 7 getting 237.	
	× 3 		        This shows long multiplication is really distribution.
	237

Mental long division seems faster than distribution still the same:

     5 		 4 does not go into 2, 4 goes into 23 5 times... write 5. This is 200/4 = 50. Same as before.
4|237		

     59 		  4∙5 =20... 23 – 20 =3, write 43 then bring down the 7. We have 37/4. Same as before.
 4|237		  4 goes into 37 9 times so write 9. 37 – 36 = 1. We have remainder 1. It need to be divided by 4 so...	
– 20  		  ¼  = 0.25. write your remiander as a fraction with divisor as denominator or bring down 0's until done.	
     37		200+36+1 =237 was found with 50+9+0.25 = 59.25.	

Mental processes are the same as written down long versions except your are doing them in your head faster to save time. That is why it is important to clearly understand the process so you do not get numbers jumbled in your head. We give the properties and laws in the beginning of the book and expect students to be able to demonstrate them on demand. We assume you can already count but want to give finer points and accelerated processes. We do not simply want you to get the right answer but also quickly and be able to prove it and and state answers with clarity and confidence. Understanding process removes self doubt and second guessing yourself. 
We hate self doubt and will not allow anyone to make us feel small and second guess ourselves. Shame on them.

Dark psychology is the practice of using verbal abuse to gaslight and manipulate victims.
It is based on making an individual second guess themselves. It causes grief and mental anguish.
We study math to have good mental health so we do not become addicted to opiates or other drugs to kill the pain.

Last Example:

y +0.75= ¾(x-3)	         Substitute a value for y that cancels the left side.
– 0.75+0.75 = ¾ (x – 3)        Use the additive inverse.
0 =¾(x – 3)		          		 
0 = 3x/4 – 9/4		         	
9/4 = 3x/4		         	 
9 = 3x			          	
3 = x			         This says when  y = –0.75   x = 3  we have point (–0.75, 3)

Take point slope formula y – y1 = m(x – x1) and write your point values where indicated by the subscripts, and your slope. Then substitute a value for x and solve to find it's matching y. You use this when you need to know the height of of a point at a specific x. If you know you need to be at a certain height you can substitute that value for y and solve to find the matching x for that point.    
Graphing Quadratics 

You need to be able to: (number four on the list is most important)

Graph quadratics and cubics in standard and vertex form.
Find roots of quadratics and cubics.
Transform quadratics and cubics.
Take word problems and write them as equations recognizing what formulas to use.

y = x2 is the basic quadratic since it have no horizontal or vertical shift. We liken this to a geometric square that has a base the same length as its height. We say geometric square because we are referring to shape rather than a numerical square that is simply a product of two scalars (dots).

1. For a square x∙x = area. We want to deform this square so that it is either different dimensions or in a different location.
2. We deform it by changing side length with the use of binomial factors (x±m)(x±n) = x2±nx+mx± mn.
3. We simplify this formula to x2+bx+c and call this the “standard formula for a quadratic”.
4. We can scale this quadratic by multiplying all terms by a variable scalar we call “a” giving ax2+abx+ac.
5. We simplify this by writing as ax2+bx+c where abc are simply the coefficients of some x variable.
6. At this point however we have changed the definition of a to be only scaling the leading x term and not all three.
7. In any case all three terms will have coefficients and to scale or factor you have to multply all three terms by the same scalar. 
8. I am calling it a scalar because it is easier to write than “leading coefficient” and because it is the most genralized name for a coefficient. All coefficients are scalars. 

The vertex of x2 is at (0,0). We graph this by plotting (0,0) first and then every other point we wish. 
Points will be in the format of x = square root y = square. Every point is then (the root, the square) for (x,y).
If we want to find a point (x,y) we write some constant for x and then x2 for y giving (x,x2). 
It helps to memorize the list of squares in the multiplcation table up to 252 = 625.

3x2 –9x+6		This says a lot... please factor so we can see what is happening. Show me how x2 became this.
3(x2 –3x+2)		Factor out the leading coefficient from every term. When a=1 we have a monic form.
3((x–1)(x–2))		Factor into binomial factor form. Please mind your () two pairs are needed here.

Doing this helps us graph it. Plot the roots please at (1,0)(2,0). We need the vertex and a pair of matching points.
Find the vertex:

x2 –3x+2			x2 –3x+2 will share the same x for vertex as its child function y =3x2 –9x+6
bx = –3x 			vertex has an x value of half the b coefficient
–b/2 = 3/2 			this says vertex is (1.5, y)...take the additive inverse of –3 to get 3

y = 3(x2 –3x+2)				
⅓y = (x2 –3x+2)		clearing “a” so I can see my work and not use another ()
⅓y = (3/2)2 –3(3/2)+2		substituting for x to solve for y
⅓y = 9/4 – 9/2 +2 		
⅓y = – ¼ 			this says vertex for parent is (3/2 ,–¼) 
y = – ¾  			this says vertex for child is   (3/2 ,– ¾)

The monic equation  x2 –3x+2 has a vertex of (3/2 ,–¼). This is the “parent” function. We need the vertex for 3x2 –9x+6.
The scaled equation 3x2 –9x+6 has a vertex of  (3/2 ,–¾). This is the “child” function. Plot  (3/2 ,–¾).

Decimals are easier to read, fractions are easier to operate. You can say  (3/2 ,–¾) or (1.5, –0.75)
We have three points; the vertex (3/2 ,–¾), and the square roots (1,0) and (2,0)...

The vertex has an x value directly between the two roots. To find x take an average of the two roots. (1+2)/2 = 1.5.
The easiest way to find the x value for the vertex is to add both roots and divide by 2. We call this the determinant. 
To find the y value take your solution for x, (– b/2a), and substitute back in the equation.

...we need two more points. Find the y intercept and the horizontal point opposite it.

y = 3x2 –9x+6			
y = 3(0)2 – 9(0) +6		this says we are using x = 0 to find the y intercept 
y = 6				this says y intercept is (0,6)

2(0 –1.5) = – 3			this is written usually...it says we need to restrict domain by 3 units (3,6)  
				The point (3,6) is opposite the y intercept 

With at least 5 points we can graph a quadratic.
These 5 points are the ones to use every time.

 For fun convert into vertex form:

y =3x2 –9x+6
y =3(x2 –3x+2)
y =3(x2 –3x+2 +0.25 – 0.25)   pay attention here...
y =3((x2 –3x+2.25) – 0.25)  
y =3((x–1.5)2 – 0.25)		
y =3(x–1.5)2 – 0.75           ...and here

3(x–1.5)2 – 0.75	this is vertex form	



The blue function is 3x2 – 9x+6 and the red one is x2 – 2x+3.
They both share the same roots of (1,0) and (2,0).

Red  has a vertex of (1.5, –¼).
Blue has a vertex of (1.5, –¾).


Finding the y intercept was matter of fact. Likewise was finding the point opposite it. 
From the vertex we go ±1.5 to either point. Wasn't sure how to express this so wrote: 2(0 –1.5) = – 3			
I could have said  2(0 +1.5) = 3 but that is a little weak. How should we define the point at (3,6)?

The line of symmetry runs vertical through the vertex. Every point on the parabola has a point directly opposite it horizontally, they are “twin” points. To find the y intercept and its twin use 6 for y and v ±1.5.

Since intercept is at (0,6) we have to (–)1.5 from vertex and (+)6.75.
Going the other direction we (+)1.5 and (+)6.75 to get (3,6)

v is used for x value and u is used for y value. (–) an (+) mean add or subtract.

We can define the twin of y intercept simply as  2(distance from vertex) or we can write in terms of domain:
–3 means subtracting 3 from the x axis to locate an x value of a point at any height. It can be on the x axis or not. 

For completing the square:

1. y =3(x2 –3x+2)
2. y =3(x2 –3x+2 +0.25 – 0.25)		

To complete the square “a” must equal 1. The quadratic must be monic. Monic means having a coefficient of 1.
To complete the square we need to use the determinant by first squaring it and then adding and subtracting it. By both adding and subtracting we are canceling it so that we remove the same amount that we added. This prevents the equation from taking on a different value. That is the highlight of the beauty of the technique.

We use the determinate to determine what square to use because by definition it is half the coefficient of bx when the  quadratic is monic. Half the coefficient of b implies we have the constant component of a perfect square trinomial.

A perect square trinomial has the form (a+b)(a+b) = a2+ab+ab+b2 = a2 +2ab+b2. Here bx is written as 2ab and half of 2ab is 2ab/2 = ab. The two middle terms are identical such that they are both square roots of b2. Using numbers is clearer:

(x+3)(x+3) = x2 +3x+3x = x2+6x+9........bx = 6x so b = 6 and b/2 = 3...3 =√9........b/2 =√9 so    b/2 =√c.

For a perfect square we need to add something to make the c term equal b2..
The way to do that is take b/2 and square it to find the number c should equal... 
Then compare what c we have and how much it is off....
Adjust c by “+ or –” the amount needed. 
Whatever you add (or subtract) you must subtract (or add) to keep equation balanced. 

Remember that quadratics are formulas for area, if you add to the equation you are stating an incorrect area.
What you add you must cancel by subtracting or else area is affected.

y =3(x2 –3x+2)				bx = –3x = – 1.5x – 1.5x.... we get (x –1.5)2.... we get –1.52 = 2.25 for “c”  
y =3(x2 –3x+2 +0.25 – 0.25)		we already had 2 for “c” and need to add ¼ more. We add ¼ so subtract it.


y =3(x2 –3x+2) and y =3(x2 –3x+2 +0.25 – 0.25) because they have the same area.
     3(x2 –3x+2)	    =    	 3(x2 –3x+2 +0.25 – 0.25)  they are equivalent under transitive law. If we do this....

y = 10				this says y equals 10
y = 10 + ¼ – ¼   		this says y equals 10

y = 10 + ¼			this says y equals 10, but it shouldn't because we know that y is supposssed to equal ten
¼ +y = 10 +¼			this says y equals 10... good.  
y= 10 + ¼ – ¼     		this says y equals 10 because we are canceling “ + ¼ –¼ ”

If we add to our polynomial the area for y increases and it should not do that. But we need those numbers so we can factor. If we add the number we need to factor and then subtract the same number then we do not add to the area and still get to factor to solve. This is a trick that is neat.

When completing the square and you have a binomial like x2 +10x you write x2+10x+25 – 25 and then factor using ()
  															        
x2+10x				this is the best time to use completing the square as it has “c” missing 		        
x2+10x+25 –25			10/2 = 5   52 25... add 25 but also subtract 25. +25–25 = 0 we did not add area!    	        
(x2+10x+25) – 25		use () to group a trinomial								        
(x +5)2 – 25			we factored what we grouped and have – 25 on the outside. Our vertex is at (–5, – 25)  

Anything in vertex form is easy to graph. We did standard form for rigor.
y =3(x2 –3x+2 +0.25 – 0.25)   			since we needed 2.25 and already had 2 we only need to add 0.25
						the usual explaination says to add “(b/2a)2 – (b/2a)2 ” which is hard to read 

y =3((x2 –3x+2.25) – 0.25)  			we group the three terms that make our perfect square
						any polynomial is a sum and sums can be grouped any order
						
y =3((x–1.5)2 – 0.25)				we factor... this gives us vector form with the scalar “3” on the outside
y =3(x–1.5)2 – 0.75           			finally this gives us vector form of with the “3” on the inside

 3(   (x–1.5)2 – 0.25  )		this is the vector form of x2 –2x+3 because it has a 3 factored out of the ()
 3(x–1.5)2 – 0.75		this is the vector form of 3x2 –6x +9 because it has the 3 distributed inside the () 
 a(x –h)2 +k			this matches the colors above it

“a” is the scale factor called amplification, 
“x” is the x value, 
“h” is the constant that is the same value as x but opposite sign, 
k is the vertical shift.

To find vertex (h,k) use the k value as is and then use the opposite sign of h. 
This is how the formula is written and taught but it should be (x,k) where x is the oppisite sign as h.
I have explained this many times. People do not understand why we take the opposite sign of things.
I will explain one more time.

We can set an equation to a constant number or y.
If a constant number other than 0 that number means an area.
If set to 0 it means we have an area of 0.
If we have an area of 0 then we have a line.
A line can only have length not area.

Setting it to 0 means that we are looking for the length of a line.
This line is the square root of a square. This square is an alterted rectangle. We are looking for the length of the base of a rectangle by writing an artificial equation that treats this rectangle as a square. This equation has lots of cancellations in it. As such it leverages symmetry throughthe use of additive inverses which cancel to 0. 

x values give a direct number for what you are looking for. Any constant term near it is its indirect opposite.
When x is in () as a binomial the other number will be the opposite of x, so taking the opposite of that number will give you x.




We could graph negative quadratics like –3x2 +12x +35 but I think you get the idea.   
For any quadratic in any form, find the vertex or y intercept first and then the other of the five points.

Graphing Cubics

When graphing a quadratic or cubic it is easier if we have vector form. We can be rigoursous and graph quadratics in standard form but that is not recommended for cubics. Let's do both standard and vector form to compare.


standard
vector
standard
vector
–3x3 +6x2+9x
–3x((x–1)2-4)
3x3 +6x+9
3x((x+1)2+2)
(0,0) is the y intercept
(0,0) is the y intercept
(0,0) is the y intercept
(0,0) is the y intercept
–3x3 +6x2+9x
–3x(x2 –2x–3) 
–3x(x–3)(x+1)
we have roots at –1,0, and 3
–3x((x–1)2-4)
–3x(x2 –2x–3) 
–3x(x–3)(x+1)
we have roots at –1,0, and 3
3x3 +6x2+9x
3x(x2 +2x+3) 
cant factor
we have roots at 0
3x((x+1)2+2)
3x(x2 +2x+3) 
can't factor
we have roots at 0
–3x3 +6x+9			The vector form is used with graphers to quickly modify a graph and change points.
–3(x2 –2x–3+4–4)		Either one can be used to find roots. There is a cubic formula but is hard.
–3((x2 –2x+1)–4)		The standard form looks a little nicer.
–3x((x–1)2 –4)			You can convert from one form to the other by factoring or completing the square.
this is vector form   

The cubic formula is:
I included this for refrence but do not expect anyone to use it... unless they need to but I do not think they need to.
Use a graphing calculator and solve cubic roots by looking at the graph and seeing where it crosses.
I usually do not teach or recommend solving by graphing because it is inaccurate but make an exception for cubics.
Anything can be solved graphically if you have integer values for you points but when the points are fractions or radicals that have been cut off it is hard to tell what approximation from what root you are getting.

This formula is harder to remember than the quadratic formula but far from impossible. 
The first () sum repeats 4 times and the other term twice at the end, also there is a partial sum at the very end.

As always make a table and start plugging values for whatever region of the cubic you want to graph. You might want to graph when x is 50 through 67, or you might want the middle section but it is not centered on the axis. 
For this I would want near the axis because the roots are center near there.

←This is –3x3+6x2+9x. It is compressed horizontally.
This makes it bunched in the middle like a piece of string.


This is 3x3+6x2+9x. It is decompressed vertically.
This makes it flat like a string being pulled straight from the ends.

Whether or not you get a bunched or flat graph depends on the coefficients being positive or negative.
3x3–6x2+9x would be bunched because bx2 is (–).
The list of conditions is shown in earlier chapters.
Conic sections
Conic sections are cross sections of a cone. This is studied in geometry.                                                                             The four conic sections to study are parabola, circle, ellipse, and hyperbola (hy-per-bo-la).

Cross sections are made by slicing a cone as shown. The pink rectangle represents a 2d plane passing through the cut to cut it. A 2d plane has 0 thickness. In real life a blade will have thickness and remove some material due to waste. 
This waste is called “kerf”. The best example is sawdust from woodsaws. A standard blade will remove a ⅛” kerf channel. Other materials may deform and actually be longer after the cut when all slices are put side by side. 

Parabolas are cut at an angle and exit the top of the cone.
Circles form when a cone is cut horizontally.
Ovals, called ellipses here, are cut like a parabola but exit the side.
Hyperbolas are vertical cuts that form two identical parabolas.

Parabolas

Main topics of a parabola
vertex
axis of symmetry
focus
directrix 

The shape of a parabola is used in engineering to make light reflector hoods, satelittite dishes and bridge arches. 
A catenary is similar to a parabola but has a different equation, these are free hanging cables like bridge cables and utility lines.

Parabolas have two equations one for each axis:
Axis of symmetry parallel to the y axis:	y = ax2 + bx + c		
Axis of symmetry parallel to the x axis:	x = ay2 + by + c 

The first equation is called a parametric equation in pre-calculus. The second is the standard form for a quadratic. 
To graph a parabola find the vertex using the additive inverse of the determinate or by completing the square.
Make a table and input values for x to find y values.

To graph parametric equations invert the point values of a vertical parabola to get a horizontal parabola. 

If your leading coefficient, “a”, is positive your parabola will point up, inverting it will make it point right. 
If your leading coefficient, “a”, is negative your parabola will point down, inverting it will make it point left..
We call horizontal parabolas parametric equations because they fail the vertical line test for a function.

Al Khwarizmi's identity

      y = x2 – 2x + 7		this is a parabola
       0 = x2 – 2x + 7		the x intercept has a height of 0 so y gets set to 0, also this is standard form
     –7 = x2 – 2x		this makes it easier to complete the square
     –7+1 = x2 – 2x+12 +1	completed the square using 12 so I have to add 1 on each side
     –6 = (x–1)2 +1   		factor
     –7 = (x–1)2			subtract c from both sides then root			
 ±√–7 = x–1			when rooting make sure to use (±) to take botht he positive and negative roots	
1±√–7 = x			and here is our answer, almost... we have to tak e a complex root 
1±√–1∙7 =x 			factor out –1  
1±√7√–1			rewrite √–7 as (√7 ∙√–1) using exponent laws  
1±2.64i				change √–1  to i and use an aproximation for √7

This says we have 1±2.64i as roots. We can not really do anything with this so we need to go back and use the vertex formula to find our vertex.    Completing the square probably would have been faster.

–6 = (x–1)2 +1   		factor
0 = (x–1)2 +7			this is vertex formula a(x–h)2 +k
(1,7)				this is vertex point

f(x) = (x–1)2 +7
x
y
(1,7)
0
8
2
8
3
11
4
16

When graphing plot the vertex first and then four more points. Have two pairs of horizontal points.
You can see our points from the table on the graph. We have a vertex and two horizontal pairs.

To graph a parametric equation we take a standard quadratic and invert the points. 
Remember a quadratic does not have an inverse function but we can make a graph anyways.
We call it parametric because it is an equation but is not a function. 

Take (x-1)2 +y and invert x and y. Invert here means switch places. 

f(y) = (y–1)2 +7
x
y
(7,1)
8
0
8
2
11
3
16
4

We notice a problem. When we input 8 we get 0 and 2. That doesn't make any sense so it is not a function.
We can graph it but we can not say what a single answer is. In real life it means that you have two choices for a number when only one will work like how much medicine to give someone or how much money is in there bank account.

You would not appreciate if a bank teller told you, “I'm sorry I'm not sure if you have $1300 or –$4000”. 
Parametric curves are graphed in precalclus and deal with location like a light or radio wave reflecting in two directions, signal strength of wi-fi in a remote area, and other technology. It comes up in the study of polar coordinates.

The dark graph was made using a mode called “invert color”. I added it for fun. What it does is changes reds to blues and blacks to whites under the rgb color scheme.

Original function:f(x) = (x–1)2 +7 				Now reverse the order: 8 –7 –(±1) = 0 or 2  
		  										1±1 = 0 or 2				
f(x) = (x–1)2 +7 		f(2) = (x–1)2 +7 						math checks				
f(0) = (0–1)2 +7 		f(2) = (2–1)2 +7 
f(0) = (–1)2 +7 			f(2) = (1)2 +7 
f(0) = 1 +7 			f(2) = 1 +7 
f(0) = 8				f(2) = 8 



Parametric equation:

f(y) = (y–1)2 +7 
f(8) = (8–1)2 +7 
f(8) = (7)2 +7 
f(8) = 49 +7 = 56
(8,56) is a point on f(x) not “f(y)”

This “function” is giving us points that are not on the graph we want. It is giving us points from the old graph.  

How do I plot points for the second graph? Before all I did was swap values from the first table and put them in the second table.

It seems input a 0 or 2 and get an 8 for f(x).
It seems input an 8 and get a 0 or 2 for f(y). 

I input 8 I an either at 0 of 2 directly above it. I don't see the problem. It seems to make sense. 
We are told that failing the vertical line test fails it as a function but we can easily comput values and get two answers same as if we got two answers for quadratic roots. How come x gets special treatment and y is neglected? 

We can have two y's for one x but not two x's for one y. How come? 
We can easily compute value either way and a grapher has no problem drawing so it must be using the same logic as us.

If we can do it and the computer can do it, why does every textbook say we can't?

Point is they lied and made us do all those complicated compositions to confuse us. Then added insult to injury with wordplay and double speak. I bet the people who made these rules secretly used the terms they outlawed. Scandalous.

F circle g looks like it is saying “fog” like some type of sublimal message to insult us like we can not figure out their confusing notation. I do not trust them. Did they have a problem with square roots and could not handle duality? The numbers are said not to map back to their original x but they do. 

F(2) = (2–1)2 +7				f(0) = (0–1)2 +7
f(2) = (1)2 +7					f(0) = (–1)2 +7
f(2) = 1 +7					f(0) = 1 +7
f(2) = 8						f(0) = 8

Did it. 2 maps back to 8
Did it again. 0 maps back to 8.

The only problem I can think of is that that point slop is undefined because you have a vertical line but so what. 
A fucntion is a function if it is well defined, well having every single point on its graph defined as a constant seems good enough.

Unless they mean something like this:

f(y) = 5

5   = (y–1)2 +7
 –2 = (y – 1)2
√–2 = y – 1
1±√–2 
1±1.414i	we are not sure how to interpret this yet	
But then we get this: (5,1+√2) or (5, 1–√2)

It seems multiplying by an imaginary number 
causes a rotation around the vertex.

It seems that using the right complex number causes a 180° rotation. It was pointing at 2π but is now pointing at π.
Please refer to a unit circle for definitions on π =180°.


Is this the fabled eπi = 0 ? hmm... 
not quite because we are off the origin.

(x-1)2 = x2 –2x+1 which becomes y2–2x+1
what if we did this √y2–2x+1? 

√y2–2x+1  xlooks an awful lot like √b2 – 4ac

We are using a modified version of the quadratic formula for sideways parabolas:

y = –b ±√b2 – 4ac/2
y = 2 ±√4 – 4/2
y = 2 ±√4 – 4/2
y = 2/2
y = 1

Solving by checking the graph directly shows (1,3.449) but also (3, –1).... looking for patterns...
We find that every integer of y has a vertical integer and that every integer can be found for y such that the vertical distance increases by 2. We also find ( –1, –1.828) to have a partial match of e. 

We should stop until we better understand why and how imaginary numbers work. 
We want to know what number makes a 180° rotation because represents some type of a symmetry.
Honestly this is a section that only has two application: solving area problems in geometry of truncated cones or doing polar coordinate work in sperical trigonmetry which is a study of precaculus. Precalculus is another way of say trigonometry.





 
To put conic sections in standard form you need to complete the square.

Completing the square

1. y       		= x2 –2x +6		we need to remove all constants from right side of equation
2. y – 6 		= x2 –2x 		we need to complete the square for x2 – 2x
3. y – 6+(b/2)2 	= x2 –2x + (b/2)2	standard form always uses (b/2)2 = c: (b/2)2 = (–2/2)2 = 1 
4. y – 6 + 1	= x2 –2x + 1		we need to factor this into a perfect square to get vertex formula
5. y – 5		= (x –1)2 		we need to isolate y	
6. y 		= (x –1)2 +5		this is vertex formula a(x – h)2 +k

We completed the square, “ y equals (x –1)2 +5”. Find the vertex and vertical line of symmetry of y = (x –1)2 +5:

The vertex is of a parabola is (x,k); 	y= (x –1)2 +5 
The vertex is (1,5).	

The x = –( –h) so we usually write this as (h,k).  x is the additive inverse of (+h) or (–h). 
If 	“ a(x–4)2+k ”	then x = 4.	If 	“ a(x+4)2+k ”	then x = –4. Take the opposite of ±h to find x.
The vertical line of symmetry is x = ay + by +c.
The vertical line of symmetry is x = 1
This equation x = 1 creates a vertical line that runs through the vertex. 
It divideds the parabola into two equal parts hence symmetry.

We can shift entire graphs or single points, or piecewise sections. Moving points is called “transformations”.
For any equation start with its most basic form. A parabola is given by y = x2.
We can graph a quadratic using either the standard form or the vertex form. 
The vertex formula was invented specifically for graphing. 

Vertex formula
 (x –1)2 +5
Standard formula
x2 –2x +6
(x-1)2 + 5
graph vertex at (1,5)
graph y intercept by substituting x= 0 and solve for y
graph other points using values from a table

your vertex is at (x,y) written as (h,k)
for (x±h)2 the point (x,y) uses the additive inverse of h.

(x-h)2  then x is positive
(x+h)2  then x is negative
x2 –2x +6
graph y intercept at (0,6)
complete the square to find vertex and graph at (h,k)
graph other points using values from a table

your bx term shifts your graph orbitally.
–bx moves to the right
+bx moves to the left

x2 – bx then x value of vertex is positive
x2 + bx then x value of vertex is positive 










This needs to be shown from basics... or jump to page 153 for graphing i
Graphing parabolas with no real roots

A quadratic whose discriminant is negative will always has two imaginary roots that are complex conjugates of each other. Complex means has I in it, conjugates are terms with opposite signs that cancel. The same as an additive inverse. 

–5+5 = 0        		would be –5 and 5 are additive inverses.
–2x+5 +2x–5 		would be binomial conjugates as it is two pairs of additive inverses.
3–√2 –3+√2		would be radical conjugates.
–3i +3i			woud be complex cojugates.       

If a quadratic has all positive terms and  cx ≤ bx then roots will be imaginary complex conjugates and;
If coefficients are the same but all negative you also get complex roots but parabola faces down and;
If coefficients are the same but bx is negative you also get complex roots but parabola faces down or;
If coefficients are the same but alternate like “+,–,+” or “–,+,–” that are reflections of (+,+,+)(–,–,–)
The complex and reflected real quadratic together are calleda hyperbola (hi-per-bola): 



Blue: y= x2+2x+2 
Red:  y= x2 – 2x+2







Blue: y= –x2 –2x –2 
Red:  y= –x2 +2x –2




Inverting the signs creates reflections over the x axis. Because they are reflections they too have complex roots.
Parabolas with imaginary roots
Parent Function
Roots
vertex
Reflection:roots:vertex 
x2 +x+1
–0.5 ±√3/2i
(–½ , ¾) 
–x2–x–1 :         –½ ±√3/2i :       (–½ ,–¾)
x2 –x+1
0.5 ±√3/2i
(½ , ¾)
–x2+x–1 :           ½ ±√3/2 :         (½ ,–¾) 
x2 +2x+2
– 1±i 
(–1,1)
–x2–2x–2 :         –1±i :            (–1,–1)    
x2 –2x+2
1±i 
(1,1)
–x2+2x–2 :           1±i  :           (1,–1) 
x2+3x+3
–1.5±√3/2i   
( –1.5,0.75)
–x2–3x–3 :       –1.5±i :           (–1.5,–0.75)
x2–3x+3  
1.5±√3/2i   
(1.5, 0.75)
–x2+3x–3 :        1.5±i :            (1.5,–0.75) 

The pattern follows x value of root is –b/2a. The determinate b/2a determines your roots.
Understanding what a determinant and a discriminant are may be the only important things to learn from graphing quadratics. These two terms form the quadratic formula. Together they are the biggest takeaway from algebra 1.

When someone says you are using hyperbola they mean you are exagerating or adding unnecessarily excessive descriptors. 
To speak in hyperbola is to embelish the truth by overselling something. “
Its literally freezing” or “I'm starving” is hyperbola if it is only 48℉ or you ate earlier that day.
The last table was dense. I was trying to find patterns but table got cluttered...do not do this. 
Highlight only pertinent data or else no one will understand you. The last table is hardly communicatable.
The equations follow this pattern: coefficients of bx and cx match; coefficients are all integers; roots are all b/2a.

Here is an easier one. We can always calculate vertex by completing the square so lets focus on imaginary roots.

x2+x+1 has roots:          (–1±√3 i)/2
The radicand increses by 4 everytime the c value increases by 1. 
The root looks like the quadratic formula.

This is a simpler table and much more appreciated. Make simple tables or you will get lost in your work. The last table was an example of what not to do.


– 1±√27 I gets a 3 factored out.√56 √60 and √64 is the next time something is pulled out. Starting at √56 every next root is reducible. This is because the numbers are large enough composites to pull something out of it like a 2 or three or even be a perfect square like 64 or 100.
x2+x+2 has roots:          (–1±√7 i)/2

x2+x+3 has roots:        (–1±√11 i)/2

x2+x+4 has roots:        (–1±√15 i)/2

x2+x+5 has roots:        (–1±√19 i)/2

x2+x+6 has roots:        (–1±√23 i)/2

x2+x+7 has roots:        (–1±3√3 i)/2

x2+x+8 has roots:        (–1±√31 i)/2


Here is another successful experiment. It lists the imaginary roots in descending order as Pascal's Tree.

x2+2x+2 has roots:          –1± i
c = 2   
x2+2x+5 has roots:          –1± 2i
c = 2+3
x2+2x+10 has roots:        –1± 3i
c=2+3+5
x2+2x+17 has roots:        –1± 4i
c=2+3+5+7
x2+2x+26 has roots:        –1± 5i
c=2+3+5+7+9
x2+2x+37 has roots:        –1± 6i
c=2+3+5+7+9+11
x2+2x+50 has roots:        –1± 7i
c=2+3+5+7+9+11+13
x2+2x+65 has roots:        –1± 8i
c=2+3+5+7+9+11+13+15
x2+2x+82 has roots:        –1± 9i
c=2+3+5+7+9+11+13+15+17
x2+2x+101 has roots:      –1± 10i
c=2+3+5+7+9+11+13+15+17+19

This is very interesting because we use Pascal's tree to understand recursion and sequences. This comes up in combinatorics, the last part of algebra befor moving on to formal geometry and trigonmetry. We use sequences to predict the next number. We write formulas that tell us the next number. What Pascal's Tree is doing is performing simple arithmetic countless times..this is how a computer does math using bnary and hexadecimal.

We said that 2 times any number will be an even number. 2 evens or 2 odds always sum to an even number.
We also said that to have an odd number it must be “2 times any number plus 1”. 
We write this as “2n = even” and “2n+1 = odds”. These times of formulascall be call Gaussian sums after Carl Gauss.

While Rene Descartes was mad people used his graphing system to study complex numbers, Carl Gauss was found of the practice. Rene called them imaginary to insult them while Gauss suggested that we call the “lateral numbers” instead. This implies imaginary numbers are simply the basis of a “z axis” for a 3d graphing system. We would call x,y,z length,height, and depth.



Complex numbers

Complex numbers are binomials that have a real and complex part. Just as 3x+4y can not be further simplied neither can 3+2i. A real number has a different base than a complex number and different bases means they are not like terms.
The form for complex numbers is a+bi where a is a real number and bi is a complex number. B is the coefficient of i and i is √–1. The first appearance of complex numbers is during the quadratic formula. We find that the discriminate can have a negative square root and this caused problems for people until they invented complex numbers as a way to cope. If a quadratic is scaling a recectangle in the x,y plane then a complex number scales it in the x,z plane. We still are stretching it longer with the x axis but instead of stretching it taller with the y axis we are stretching it deeper with the z axis here called the complex axis.

The discriminate is the part of the quadratic formula that discriminates as to what is allowed to be considered canidates for the roots of a quadratic polynomial. We went over this before that if √b2 – 4ac < 0 you have two complex roots that are conjugates of each other. This means that the discriminate will be a signed number in the radical.

x2+2x+2 			We can not factor this because it is prime. Use the quadratic formula to find the roots.
–b± √b2 – 4ac ÷2a		We can perform this mentally with (–2±√4–8)/2 = –1±i  .

–2±√22 –4∙1∙2 ÷2∙1		Substitute for abc coefficients
–2±√4 –4∙2 ÷2			Cancel c because it is “1” then simplify b2. When a =1 we don't write it at all 
–2±√4 –8 ÷2			This is just simple arithmetic
–2±√–4 ÷2
–2±√–1∙2∙2 ÷2			Factor – 4
–2±2√–1 ÷2			Factor out 2
–1±1√–1 			Divide numerators by 2. The numerators are –b/2a ± √ –b^2 –4ac/2a
–1±1i				Write √–1 as i 
–1±i				Hide coefficient of 1
 
The quadratic formula can solve any quadratic even ones that have decimals, radicals, and even complex numbers...
but how do we graph? We make a table using inputs for x to find five points. If vertex is near the y -intercept then add two more twin points to extends the parabola.

Vertex: – b/2a for x... plug in to solve for y. 	x = –2/2	y = –12 –2+2 = 1	v = (–1,1)   
Vertex is its own twin, the two points overlap.

With this much data you need to organize it using a spreadsheet. A spreadsheet is a table for data entry. 
Without a table it is too easy for data to get corrupted or put in the wrong row. 

x2+2x+2    = y	First 11 points: substitute integers for x 	
v – a 	First 11 twins: subtract common difference from line of symmetry
0+0+2       = 2		(0,2)
–1–1   = – 2		(–2,2) 
12 +2+2     = 5		(1,5)	
–1–2   = – 3		(–3,5)
22+4+2      = 10		(2,10)
–1–3   = – 4		(–4,10) 	
32+6+2      = 17		(3,17)	
–1–4   = – 5		(–5,17)
42 +8+2     = 26		(4,26)
–1–5   = – 6		(–6,26) 		
52 +10 +2  = 37		(5,37)	
–1–6   = – 7		(–7,37)
62 +12 +2  = 50		(6,50)
–1–7   = – 8		(–8,50)
72 +14 +2  = 65		(7,65)	
–1–8   = – 9		(–9,65)
82 +16 +2  = 82		(8,82)
–1–9   = – 10		(–10,82) 		
92 + 18+2  = 101		(9,101)	
–1–10 = – 11		(–11,101)
102+ 20 +2  = 122	(10,122)
–1–11 = – 12		(–12,122)
Graphing Sideways Parabolas

For any “y2” sideways parabola find its inverse function, make a table of x2 points, and then invert the points and plot to draw the sideways parabola.  For anything you might encounter use the previous steps and methods from before but modify them to work with y2 instead of x2. Set equations to x instead of y. Look for x intercept instead of y intercept. Use the horizontal line of symmetry for the vertex instead of vertical. Everything is the same except formulas switch x and y. 

Multiplying by √–1 aka “i” causes a 90° rotation about the “focus” taking the parabola through all 4 quadrants 


		        y2 and its inverse x2				    	        –y2 and its inverse –x2 		




 

			






Rotations involving the multiplication of i are called “complex” or “rotations around the complex plane”.
The complex plane is similar to the xy plane except x becomes the “real axis” and y becomes “the imaginary” axis. 

For all intents and purposes the xy plane is a 2d plane of length and height the complex plane is a 2d plane of length and depth. We have three dimensions given by xyz but here they call z “i” for how this “third” dimension arrived.
We could have an xyz graph and then also add a fourth dimension of i to represent time or motion or in the case of tensors some static attribute. Bear in mind the imaginary axis is not defined as the “z” axis but can be thought of that way.

Complex numbers follow the form a+bi where a is a real number on the x axis (here called real line) and bi is a number on the y axis (here called in\maginary of complex line). Graphing standard parabolas with no real roots always gives two imaginary roots in the form a+bi.


Here is one application. A manifold like a water or gas pipe, or maybe car muffler. Pipes at a petreoleum refinery.
The traditional xy axes would graph the opening of the pipe or its fittings to give “od” and “id” which is “outside diameter” and “inside diameter”. The diameters are different because they have thickness. Different spec pipe has different gauge to deal with different pressure. A high pressure boiler needs pipe with thicker walls than a drain pipe.
The complex plane would be a rotation placing a parabola outside of the y axis and into the “z” axis or depth. 
The back wall of the pipe is curved along its entire height so that is something to think about.   

I drew a water pipe with water currents as vector arrows. As the water reaches the bend a strange occurrence happens. Vectors at the outside bend accelerate quicker approaching a velocity of ∞ while vectors near the inside of the bend slow down approaching 0. This is a study of advanced calculus in three dimensions using Stokes theorems. Stokes theorems deal with dynamics, specifically air and water currents or any type of motion that can be generalized to “flow”.

Simply put the horizontal and vertical vectors have a constant acceleration. We can generalize acceleration to being a “rate” which can be given by slope. The rate of the red vectors approaches a slope of 1/0 the rate of the black vectors approaches 0/1. In trig this is ∞ and 0 for slope respectively. Very weird.

The best description I can give is cutting a hula hoop in half and bending it to a parabola shape. Have it sitting on the ground with cut ends points up. This is an object that has distance for x and height for that can be measured on an xy graph and approximatd by a quadratic equation. If you have it standing up on the ground the point that touches the ground shall be the vertex. Now without moving the vertex from its position lay it flat on the ground. This represents a transformaion about the complex plane.

You went from having distance and height to distance and depth. You went from (x,y) coordinates to (x,z) coordinates.
 If you flip it from having a vertex at the opening to having a vertec at the back wall the parabola fits the curved wall and extends to the mouth. This can represent different thing in vector mechanics like diameter versus length ratios for pressure or flow. Decreasing diameter reduces pressure instead of increasing. Pressure is directly proportional to diameter rather than inversly proportional like most people think. Putting your thumb over the nozzle or kinking a garden hose to increase pressure is a different phenomenon.

Graph a sideways parabola that has roots at √2i  and – √2i  :this is a loaded phrase[1]. We have one “x” with two outputs.

I would start with x = y2. This is almost like an exponential graph but parabolic having two arms... 
...x equals “ y2”. This makes y the square root of x. 

We need y = √2i  or – √2i .	If you can not figure it out use a graphing calculator and begin with y2 = x and then start transfoming it slow at first to learn very basic transformations and how to manipulate the graph.




[For “normal” parabolas finding points is easy because all we have to do is input a value and solve for y. Finding their twins is harder because various issues arise with parabolas not having inverses. A twin will have the same output but used a different x to get their. It al we have us a height hten knowing how to get back to “x” seems impossible as there is no way to write a function of it. Here we have a sideways parabola and are asking someone to graph it by looking for “roots”. This causes confusion in that they will look for “zeroes of x” when they should be looking for what x produces two y that are complex conjugates.]
Start with what we know and workbackwards. We need x = √2i  or – √2i … 
	
x = y2					we know this will give us a sideways parabola; it says y∙y = x, y is root of x.

x =   √2i    or   –√2i 		         this says that we have roots at (0,√2i) and (0, –√2i) plot these points on paper or table
				         
Although not a function, x as an input outputs two y. When x = 0 y = √2i or –√2i. Both of these are 0±√2i when written in a+bi form. If you do not see a number “a” infront of the complex root then your root has “0” for “a”. Your roots lie on the y axis.

Try plugging in 2:

x = y2 
2 = 4		  	       This  says we have a point (2,4) but we need (0,√2).
2 – 2 = 4 – 2	  	       This says we wrote “0” as “2 – 2” and “2” as “4 – 2”. This form gives us numbers to work with. 
±√2 – 2 = ±√4 – 2	       I think this is it... or not...

We are saying √0 = ±√2. Inputting x = 0 should output y = ±√2i. We need i = √–1 so somehow incorporate that data...

x = y2 
0 = ±√2i
0 = –2			This says is x = 0 then y = –2 but we also need to other “2”... take square root of both sides. 
√0 = ±√–2 		This is what it is. 

“y” equals a square root so take the square root of both sides to create an equivalence.

x = y2			Write x = y2
√x = √y2		 Take square root of both sides	
√0 = ±√–2 		Substitute x = 0 and y = –2 
√02 = ±√–2 2		square both sides
0 = –2			 not quite right, only one output
x = ±√2i
x = ±√2∙√–1		our x will equal ±1.414i 

If x= y2 produces (0,2i) then how do we transform this so that x will equal (0,1.414i)? Do we shift graph left or right or something else? If we need to turn 0 = –2 into 0 = ±1.414 then 2 needs to become √2. 

If we focus only on the top part of the parabola it becomes easy to think about it as a logarithm.
x = y2 will start at (0,0) and then curve toward (2,√2)  we want (0,√2). We want 0 = 1.414 not 2 so...
We need to subtract 2 from something.The graph needs to be shifted to the left... so we need to add to the domain of x.
We do not want the domain to start at (0,0) we want it to start at “further back”... we only have four choices:
x = y2 –2	or 	x –2 = y2	or 	x = y2 +2 	or  	x +2 = y2

We try all four and find that x = y2 –2 is the same as x +2 = y2.

x = y2			this is basic shape
x +2 = y2		this shifts it to the left
x = y2 – 2		this is isolating to solve for x. We would call this standard form.

We used guess and check or used a grapher to quickly check guesses visually. Using a grapher is called solving by graphing. Unless we have a better way to solve that is what we are stuck with. There are better ways and we will find them. When using guess and check refine your answers and then derive a formula for all problems not just the one you are working on. Creating a formula is called “generalizing” for all x. It is what we are supposed to do.
What equation has roots at ±√2?

1. realize that a = 0 in a+bi
2. sub that in and get 0+√2i
3. change √2i to √–2 or even ±1.414 to make it easier to work with
4. write x = y2 and think about how it should be transformed
5. realize that if y2 then the line of symmetry is the x axis. 
6. This is obvious because you have matching complex conjugates  –√2 and √2.  
7. If (y–h)2 then it is shifted up or down and x axis is no longer line of symmetry
8. If shifted your two roots will have different values because you are offset by some amount
9. This is similar to x2 = y has y axis as line of symmetry but (x–h)2 will shift it left or right
10. x2 – 4 has roots at –2 and 2 but (x-1)2 –4 has roots at – 1 and 3. the difference is the same but is offset by 1
11. for (x–1)2 –4 roots are  –2+1 = –1 or 2+1 = 3. – 1 and 3 are different so y axis is no longer line of symmetry.
12. Having an axis for line of symmetry makes solving easier because we know that a vertex form is not being used.
13. If an axis is line of symmetry then we do not have (x–h)2  =y or (y–h)2 =x. We are only transforming with “k”.

We are given roots at ±√2 so we know that h=0 and we have no “binomial shift” only “lateral shift”.
For a sideways parabola roots are where the parabola crosses the y axis not the x axis.
We know parabola crosses at ±√2 so we have two solutions. If we Shift the parabola to the far right then we have no solutions for where it crosses the y axis, not even imaginary. We would have something like “imaginary imaginary” solutions. Things like that need a better language to describe than algebra currewntly offers so we save that for pre-calculus and trigonometry where we plot these type of graphs using vector form and call them “parametric equations”.

Let's write a clean formula, look at some graphs, and then move on to ellipses.

x = ±√2i		meaning x = the square root so... 
x + 2 = y2		we can get an equation by shifting to the left by the square of the radical.
x = y2 – 2		y2 – k or (y –h)2 – k is standard form for a sideways parabola.


x2 =y	this gives (x,y) as points	We can reverse this and make sideways parabola: √x   =y	this gives (x,y) as points
22 = 4											         √4   = 2	
32 = 9											         √9   = 3
42 = 16											         √16 = 4
52 = 25											         √25 = 5
02 = 0											         √0   = 0


x2 –2 =y  this gives (x,y) as points	We can reverse this and make sideways parabola: x =√y–2 this gives (x,y) as points
22 = 4–2										           4   = 2–2  	
32 = 9	–2										           9   = 3–2
42 = 16	–2										           16 = 4–2
52 = 25	–2										           25 = 5–2
02 = 0	–2										            0   = 0–2
x2 – 2											y2 – 2
(0∙0) –2 = – 2 										0 –√–2 = √–2
we have 0±2 as roots									we have 0±2i as roots

Here we square x and minus 2							Here we square y and minus 2
inputting 0 we get – 2 and 2 as roots							inputting 0 we get –2i and 2i as roots 

y2 – 2  = x	y2 =x gives us a parabola that is rotated 90° to the right from x2 = y; “–2”  shifts vertex 2 units to the left.
y2 = x+2	“y2– 2” shifts 2 to the left... “x+2” also shifts 2 to the left. They are the same ratio so have the same shift.
A good application for this would be rocket science. In the old days Achimedes and DaVinci studied projectile motion because the needed to help their government win wars with ballistae, “scorpions” and trebuchet. A scorpion is a large crossbow that fires a huge bolt that is the size of a small log. They concerned themselves with ballistic missiles.

A ballistic missile is given by some negative parabola using vector form like –a(x–h)2 =y.

We are attacking a castle.
We launch our “missile”.
We launch from (0,0), this is where missile “takes off”.  
We have to get the right trajectory to go over the castle wall and land at the right spot inside castle walls.
Missile lands at (4,0).
If arc is too low we hit wall.
If trajectory is wrong we miss target.


The x axis is taken to be the ground. We ignore parts of graph that are not in first quadrant.
Those parts do not concern our application. Changing our equation will change height of vertex and width of parabola from “ground zero” to target. Equation used here is –0.5(x–2)2+2=y. A less violent application would be modeling golf swing flight trajectories to design a better lightweight titanuim alloy golf club.

When would we use a sideways parabola? Cruise missiles...

We launch a missile from the ground to an incoming missle or aircraft to destroy it. We only care about the top part.
When would we care about the bottom part? 
When would we have a parabola “floating” in the first quadrant?


This models two things:
An aircraft taking off to intercept an enemy...
and the path of its fired missle to destroy enemy.




The green line is the flight path of our hero leaving the airbase.
This equation shows path and gives eta to intercepting the enemy.

Red line is flight path of cruise missile to the enemy.
Jet fighters use software with this math.
From the graph it appears our hero is 4 miles away and shooting at a target 1 mile away from him and 5 miles away from us.		

Normally we can't use the bottom part of the parabola if we are
on the ground and can not use the top part if we are in the air.
It gets more technical but this is rocket science.

We can use this math to launch satellites in space, track trajectories of asteroids, model planet orbits, all sorts of things.
This is the sort of math the airforce and NASA wants their pilots to know.

Ballistic missles fall to the ground freely being assisted by gravity so we model them with a(x–h)2 +k.
Cruise and hybrid missles are rocket powered and give more of a “sideways” flight. a(y–h)2 +k. The rest is a secret.
Complex number rules


(x+4)(x+4) = x2 +4x+4x+16 


1. 


	
								
								bx = –9x
								–b/2a = 1.5 

								y =3x2 –9x+6



Here is a problem that uses standard form:
Casella is making a nut mixture. Bags come in mixtures of 10%and 40% of peanuts. How many bags of each to make a 10 pound mixture of 25% peanuts.

The main part of this problem is we need 10 pounds. 
x+y = 10(pounds)

we can say what two numbers add to 10? we can make a list.

The lesser part is that 10% and 40% will mix to 25%. 
we can put all this data in a table, pounds and percents.

Focus on how many pounds you need for each percent and do the math.
Make a guess. Your result will familarize you will the problem and tell you if it was too high or low of a certain type.
The you can probably see a pattern and mentally solve with some counting.

All the choices that add to 10 pounds:	1+9	2+8	3+7	4+6	5+5 	6+4	7+3	8+2	9+1
Use whole numbers for percents.
Structure you problem.

x+y = 10 pounds

 













Combinatorics






















Geometry


































Trigonometry


































Word Problems



































Assessment Tests
a
Inverse of a function

The inverse of a function is when you swap x and y values. 
A function is only a function if it passes the vertical line test. 
If a vertical line touches the graph only once then it is a function if it touches twice then it is not a function.

A function has an inverse function if it passes the horizontal line test. If a horizontal line touches the graph only once then it has an inverse. If it touches at least twice then it does not have an inverse.

The inverse of a linear equation of the form y = Mx+b is found by changing the slope “M” of x to the negative reciprocal of “M”.  This creates a line perpendicular to the original function representing a 90° rotation. To position the inverse function so that it touches a given point of the original function use the y-intercept form but use the negative reciprocal and rewrite it as y1 = –M-1x1 +B  substituting  x1,y1 with values of the point you want to intercept. The identity function is a special case where it is its on inverse. Cretating a line with formula stated gives a line 90° perpendicular to the identity function but is not the inverse function of it.

M= slope  
–M–1 = negative reciprocal of M 
M = 3x becomes –M–1 = – (⅓)x

▲:3,4,5 gives a point B:(3,4)
Y= mx+b
y = – ⅓x+b
4 = – ⅓(3)+b
4 = – 2.25+b
6.25 = b	

y = – ¾x + 6.25 creates a 90° tangential line at point B. This is the tangent and cotangent line.   
▲ 3:4:5→ s = 0.2
s(3:4:5) → 0.6:0.8:1

cos = 3/5	cosine goes from origin to (0.6,0) using equation y = 0 {0 ≤ x ≤ 0.6}
sin = 4/5	sine goes from (0.6,0) to (0.6,0.8) using equation x = 0.6 {0 ≤ y ≤ 0.8}
tan = 4/3 	we have to use sin/cos for tangent as point of tangency in the unit circle.
Radius = 1	we have to use tangent as slope for radius in y = Mx +b.
f(x) = (4/3)x 	where function f(x) is the function for the radius. Restrict domain using {0 ≤ x ≤ 0.6}
  
The tangent line is found by taking the negative inverse of f(x) = (4/3)x and substituting sin and cos for y and x . y = Mx + b → 0.8 = – (¾)0.6+b → 1.25 = b → y = – ¾x + 1.25 

Quadratics like like x2 and cubics like x3 ± x2 do not have inverse functions because they fail the horizontal line test. A horizontal line will touch two points on x2 at every elevation of x2 except at the vertex. A cubic like x3 + x2  will touch at three points near the middle inbetween the inflection points. This is prohibited and proves they do not have inverse functions.

A function only has an inverse if it is “1 to 1”. If it is one to one it will pass the horizontal line test.
“1 to 1” means that one x value maps to one y value. If a function is not 1 to 1 if will fail the horizontal line test. If it fails the horizontal line test attempting to swap x and y values will create a graph that is not a function and therefore not an inverse function. This is defined as “1 to 1 correspondence” which can be confused with injective sets. 



