I deleted components/navbar. It was an empty relic. Partial folder contains html components for inserting into pages. Templates contains full pages or modular skeletons to be inserted with html elements using div tags.


Deparment folders were planned to be added later to images but I did that now. I do not have any real content in this repo since this is a clean build. All my files are in the old repo named "mg".


 I want to get the python script working to autogenerate index pages before anything else to avoid orphan pages. The folders are 1-2 files at most with index.html generated by python being the main file, and a sample plug and play html file containg all css, js, and a navbar. I want the navbar to be placed in the menu and responsive. Links to main static pages needs to be updated from # dummy links it has now.


 Library folder is deep. It will grow very deep. Almost a stand alone site. Encyclopedia follows interesting content that is not necessarily course required, it gives explanied defitions and covers other topics much like wikipedia. Dictionary is standard American englishh. Focus is on building vocabulary, grammar and prounciation. Small words like cat are omitted, long words, frequently mispelled words, or technical words are added keeping dictionary slim but purposeful.




Right now I need to:


1. Lock in CSS and main.js in python script (done)
2. Build a better default template them lock that into python script (not done). I need to clarify:


- How do I add submenus for navigation and what wil the layout look like?
- How will I replace the functional design I have now with a more professional tall header at the top of all pages with school logo?
- How to place main home navbar under header
- How to place submenu under navbar
- How to place pace headers under submenu 


Design goals:
1. Header at top with school logo on left, School Name prominent in center.
2. A responsive main navbar that has links to root index, about, contact, founder, mission, departments, and library.
3. main.js script (done)
4. footer (done)


I really am stuck at nailing the static homepage. The top of pages needs work. Anything under main is covered for now (main.js + footer). The first step is building a consistent header at the top of pages with school logo to the left and school name on the right. This is basic design but I do not remember how to do it correctly. 


Help me design a more powerful template that serves as the base for all pages. Once that is done I can generate indexes for all department folders. Then I can use converter to ssn generator new pages for any department.